<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Haggai 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Haggai<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Glory to Come</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> On the twenty-first day of the seventh month, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came through the prophet Haggai again: <span class="verse">2:2</span> “Ask the following questions to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak, and the remnant of the people: <span class="verse">2:3</span> ‘Who among you survivors saw the former splendor of this temple? How does it look to you now? Isn’t it nothing by comparison?’ <span class="verse">2:4</span> Even so, take heart, Zerubbabel,” decrees the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. “Take heart, Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest. And take heart all you citizens of the land,” decrees the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “and begin to work. For I am with you,” decrees the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. <span class="verse">2:5</span> “Do not fear, because I made a promise to your ancestors when they left Egypt, and my Spirit even now testifies to you.” <span class="verse">2:6</span> Moreover, this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has said: “In just a little while I will once again shake the sky and the earth, the sea and the dry ground. <span class="verse">2:7</span> I will also shake up all the nations, and they will offer their treasures; then I will fill this temple with glory.” So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has said. <span class="verse">2:8</span> “The silver and gold will be mine,” decrees the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. <span class="verse">2:9</span> “The future splendor of this temple will be greater than that of former times,” the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has declared. “And in this place I will give peace,” decrees the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Promised Blessing</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:10</span> On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month of Darius’ second year, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to the prophet Haggai: <span class="verse">2:11</span> “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has said, ‘Ask the priests about the law. <span class="verse">2:12</span> If someone carries holy meat in a fold of his garment and that fold touches bread, a boiled dish, wine, olive oil, or any other food, will that item become holy?’” The priests answered, “It will not.” <span class="verse">2:13</span> Then Haggai asked, “If a person who is ritually unclean because of touching a dead body comes in contact with one of these items, will it become unclean?” The priests answered, “It will be unclean.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> Then Haggai responded, “‘The people of this nation are unclean in my sight,’ decrees the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. ‘And so is all their effort; everything they offer is also unclean. <span class="verse">2:15</span> Now therefore reflect carefully on the recent past, before one stone was laid on another in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. <span class="verse">2:16</span> From that time when one came expecting a heap of twenty measures, there were only ten; when one came to the wine vat to draw out fifty measures from it, there were only twenty. <span class="verse">2:17</span> I struck all the products of your labor with blight, disease, and hail, and yet you brought nothing to me,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">2:18</span> ‘Think carefully about the past: from today, the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, to the day work on the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was resumed, think about it. <span class="verse">2:19</span> The seed is still in the storehouse, isn’t it? And the vine, fig tree, pomegranate, and olive tree have not produced. Nevertheless, from today on I will bless you.’”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Zerubbabel the Chosen One</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:20</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Haggai a second time on the twenty-fourth day of the month: <span class="verse">2:21</span> “Tell Zerubbabel governor of Judah: ‘I am ready to shake the sky and the earth. <span class="verse">2:22</span> I will overthrow royal thrones and shatter the might of earthly kingdoms. I will overthrow chariots and those who ride them, and horses and their riders will fall as people kill one another. <span class="verse">2:23</span> On that day,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, ‘I will take you, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, my servant,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, ‘and I will make you like a signet ring, for I have chosen you,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies.” </p>

</body>
</html>