<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 42</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 42</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Commissions His Special Servant</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:1</span>  “Here is my servant whom I support,</p>
<p class="poetry">my chosen one in whom I take pleasure.</p>
<p class="poetry">I have placed my Spirit on him;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will make just decrees for the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:2</span> He will not cry out or shout;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will not publicize himself in the streets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:3</span> A crushed reed he will not break,</p>
<p class="poetry">a dim wick he will not extinguish; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will faithfully make just decrees. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:4</span> He will not grow dim or be crushed </p>
<p class="poetry">before establishing justice on the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">the coastlands will wait in anticipation for his decrees.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:5</span> This is what the true God, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, says—</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who created the sky and stretched it out,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who fashioned the earth and everything that lives on it, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who gives breath to the people on it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and life to those who live on it: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:6</span> “I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, officially commission you; </p>
<p class="poetry">I take hold of your hand.</p>
<p class="poetry">I protect you and make you a covenant mediator for people, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a light to the nations, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:7</span> to open blind eyes, </p>
<p class="poetry">to release prisoners from dungeons,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who live in darkness from prisons. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Intervenes</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:8</span> “I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! That is my name!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not share my glory with anyone else,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the praise due me with idols. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:9</span> Look, my earlier predictive oracles have come to pass; </p>
<p class="poetry">now I announce new events.</p>
<p class="poetry">Before they begin to occur,</p>
<p class="poetry">I reveal them to you.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">42:10</span> Sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> a brand new song!</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise him from the horizon of the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">you who go down to the sea, and everything that lives in it, </p>
<p class="poetry">you coastlands and those who live there.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:11</span> Let the wilderness and its cities shout out,</p>
<p class="poetry">the towns where the nomads of Kedar live.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the residents of Sela shout joyfully;</p>
<p class="poetry">let them shout loudly from the mountaintops. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:12</span> Let them give the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> the honor he deserves; </p>
<p class="poetry">let them praise his deeds in the coastlands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> emerges like a hero,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a warrior he inspires himself for battle; </p>
<p class="poetry">he shouts, yes, he yells,</p>
<p class="poetry">he shows his enemies his power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:14</span> “I have been inactive for a long time;</p>
<p class="poetry">I kept quiet and held back.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a woman in labor I groan;</p>
<p class="poetry">I pant and gasp. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:15</span> I will make the trees on the mountains and hills wither up; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will dry up all their vegetation.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will turn streams into islands, </p>
<p class="poetry">and dry up pools of water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:16</span> I will lead the blind along an unfamiliar way; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will guide them down paths they have never traveled. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will turn the darkness in front of them into light,</p>
<p class="poetry">and level out the rough ground. </p>
<p class="poetry">This is what I will do for them.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not abandon them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:17</span> Those who trust in idols</p>
<p class="poetry">will turn back and be utterly humiliated, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who say to metal images, ‘You are our gods.’ </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Reasons with His People</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:18</span> “Listen, you deaf ones!</p>
<p class="poetry">Take notice, you blind ones!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:19</span> My servant is truly blind,</p>
<p class="poetry">my messenger is truly deaf.</p>
<p class="poetry">My covenant partner, the servant of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, is truly blind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:20</span> You see many things, but don’t comprehend; </p>
<p class="poetry">their ears are open, but do not hear.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:21</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> wanted to exhibit his justice</p>
<p class="poetry">by magnifying his law and displaying it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:22</span> But these people are looted and plundered;</p>
<p class="poetry">all of them are trapped in pits </p>
<p class="poetry">and held captive in prisons.</p>
<p class="poetry">They were carried away as loot with no one to rescue them;</p>
<p class="poetry">they were carried away as plunder, and no one says, “Bring that back!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:23</span> Who among you will pay attention to this?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who will listen attentively in the future? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:24</span> Who handed Jacob over to the robber?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who handed Israel over to the looters? </p>
<p class="poetry">Was it not the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, against whom we sinned?</p>
<p class="poetry">They refused to follow his commands;</p>
<p class="poetry">they disobeyed his law. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:25</span> So he poured out his fierce anger on them, </p>
<p class="poetry">along with the devastation of war.</p>
<p class="poetry">Its flames encircled them, but they did not realize it; </p>
<p class="poetry">it burned against them, but they did not take it to heart. </p>

</body>
</html>