<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ephesians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ephesians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Relationship to the Divine Mystery</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles <span class="verse">3:2</span> if indeed you have heard of the stewardship of God’s grace that was given to me for you, <span class="verse">3:3</span> that by revelation the mystery was made known to me, as I wrote before briefly. <span class="verse">3:4</span> When reading this, you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ <span class="verse">3:5</span> (which was not disclosed to people in former generations as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit), <span class="verse">3:6</span> namely, that through the gospel the Gentiles are fellow heirs, fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">3:7</span> I became a servant of this gospel according to the gift of God’s grace that was given to me by the exercise of his power. <span class="verse">3:8</span> To me—less than the least of all the saints —this grace was given, to proclaim to the Gentiles the unfathomable riches of Christ <span class="verse">3:9</span> and to enlighten everyone about God’s secret plan —the mystery that has been hidden for ages in God who has created all things. <span class="verse">3:10</span> The purpose of this enlightenment is that through the church the multifaceted wisdom of God should now be disclosed to the rulers and the authorities in the heavenly realms. <span class="verse">3:11</span> This was according to the eternal purpose that he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord, <span class="verse">3:12</span> in whom we have boldness and confident access to God by way of Christ’s faithfulness. <span class="verse">3:13</span> For this reason I ask you not to lose heart because of what I am suffering for you, which is your glory. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prayer for Strengthened Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:14</span> For this reason I kneel before the Father, <span class="verse">3:15</span> from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named. <span class="verse">3:16</span> I pray that according to the wealth of his glory he will grant you to be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inner person, <span class="verse">3:17</span> that Christ will dwell in your hearts through faith, so that, because you have been rooted and grounded in love, <span class="verse">3:18</span> you will be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth, <span class="verse">3:19</span> and thus to know the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge, so that you will be filled up to all the fullness of God. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:20</span> Now to him who by the power that is working within us is able to do far beyond all that we ask or think, <span class="verse">3:21</span> to him be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, forever and ever. Amen. </p>

</body>
</html>