<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Babylon</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:1</span>  This is an oracle about Babylon that Isaiah son of Amoz saw: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:2</span>  On a bare hill raise a signal flag;</p>
<p class="poetry">shout to them,</p>
<p class="poetry">wave your hand,</p>
<p class="poetry">so they might enter the gates of the princes! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:3</span> I have given orders to my chosen soldiers; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have summoned the warriors through whom I will vent my anger — </p>
<p class="poetry">my boasting, arrogant ones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:4</span>  There is a loud noise on the mountains—</p>
<p class="poetry">it sounds like a large army! </p>
<p class="poetry">There is great commotion among the kingdoms —</p>
<p class="poetry">nations are being assembled!</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies is mustering</p>
<p class="poetry">forces for battle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:5</span> They come from a distant land,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the horizon. </p>
<p class="poetry">It is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with his instruments of judgment, </p>
<p class="poetry">coming to destroy the whole earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:6</span> Wail, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s day of judgment is near;</p>
<p class="poetry">it comes with all the destructive power of the Sovereign One. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:7</span> For this reason all hands hang limp, </p>
<p class="poetry">every human heart loses its courage. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:8</span> They panic—</p>
<p class="poetry">cramps and pain seize hold of them</p>
<p class="poetry">like those of a woman who is straining to give birth.</p>
<p class="poetry">They look at one another in astonishment;</p>
<p class="poetry">their faces are flushed red. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:9</span> Look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s day of judgment is coming;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is a day of cruelty and savage, raging anger, </p>
<p class="poetry">destroying the earth </p>
<p class="poetry">and annihilating its sinners. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:10</span> Indeed the stars in the sky and their constellations</p>
<p class="poetry">no longer give out their light; </p>
<p class="poetry">the sun is darkened as soon as it rises,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the moon does not shine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:11</span>  I will punish the world for its evil, </p>
<p class="poetry">and wicked people for their sin.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will put an end to the pride of the insolent,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will bring down the arrogance of tyrants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:12</span> I will make human beings more scarce than pure gold,</p>
<p class="poetry">and people more scarce than gold from Ophir. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:13</span> So I will shake the heavens, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the earth will shake loose from its foundation, </p>
<p class="poetry">because of the fury of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the day he vents his raging anger. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:14</span> Like a frightened gazelle </p>
<p class="poetry">or a sheep with no shepherd,</p>
<p class="poetry">each will turn toward home, </p>
<p class="poetry">each will run to his homeland. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:15</span> Everyone who is caught will be stabbed;</p>
<p class="poetry">everyone who is seized will die by the sword. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:16</span> Their children will be smashed to pieces before their very eyes;</p>
<p class="poetry">their houses will be looted</p>
<p class="poetry">and their wives raped. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:17</span> Look, I am stirring up the Medes to attack them; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are not concerned about silver,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor are they interested in gold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:18</span> Their arrows will cut young men to ribbons; </p>
<p class="poetry">they have no compassion on a person’s offspring; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will not look with pity on children. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:19</span> Babylon, the most admired of kingdoms,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Chaldeans’ source of honor and pride, </p>
<p class="poetry">will be destroyed by God</p>
<p class="poetry">just as Sodom and Gomorrah were. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:20</span> No one will live there again;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one will ever reside there again. </p>
<p class="poetry">No bedouin will camp there,</p>
<p class="poetry">no shepherds will rest their flocks there. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:21</span> Wild animals will rest there,</p>
<p class="poetry">the ruined houses will be full of hyenas. </p>
<p class="poetry">Ostriches will live there,</p>
<p class="poetry">wild goats will skip among the ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:22</span> Wild dogs will yip in her ruined fortresses,</p>
<p class="poetry">jackals will yelp in the once-splendid palaces. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her time is almost up, </p>
<p class="poetry">her days will not be prolonged. </p>

</body>
</html>