<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 39</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 39</h1>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">39:1</span> “Are you acquainted with the way </p>
<p class="poetry">the mountain goats give birth?</p>
<p class="poetry">Do you watch as the wild deer give birth to their young?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:2</span> Do you count the months they must fulfill,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do you know the time they give birth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:3</span> They crouch, they bear their young,</p>
<p class="poetry">they bring forth the offspring they have carried. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:4</span> Their young grow strong, and grow up in the open; </p>
<p class="poetry">they go off, and do not return to them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:5</span> Who let the wild donkey go free?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who released the bonds of the donkey, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:6</span> to whom I appointed the arid rift valley for its home,</p>
<p class="poetry">the salt wastes as its dwelling place? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:7</span> It scorns the tumult in the town;</p>
<p class="poetry">it does not hear the shouts of a driver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:8</span> It ranges the hills as its pasture,</p>
<p class="poetry">and searches after every green plant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:9</span> Is the wild ox willing to be your servant?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will it spend the night at your feeding trough? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:10</span> Can you bind the wild ox to a furrow with its rope,</p>
<p class="poetry">will it till the valleys, following after you?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:11</span> Will you rely on it because its strength is great?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will you commit your labor to it?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:12</span> Can you count on it to bring in your grain, </p>
<p class="poetry">and gather the grain to your threshing floor? </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">39:13</span>  “The wings of the ostrich flap with joy, </p>
<p class="poetry">but are they the pinions and plumage of a stork? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:14</span> For she leaves her eggs on the ground,</p>
<p class="poetry">and lets them be warmed on the soil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:15</span> She forgets that a foot might crush them,</p>
<p class="poetry">or that a wild animal might trample them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:16</span> She is harsh with her young, </p>
<p class="poetry">as if they were not hers;</p>
<p class="poetry">she is unconcerned about the uselessness of her labor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:17</span> For God deprived her of wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">and did not impart understanding to her.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:18</span> But as soon as she  springs up, </p>
<p class="poetry">she laughs at the horse and its rider. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">39:19</span> “Do you give the horse its strength?</p>
<p class="poetry">Do you clothe its neck with a mane? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:20</span> Do you make it leap like a locust?</p>
<p class="poetry">Its proud neighing is terrifying! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:21</span> It paws the ground in the valley, </p>
<p class="poetry">exulting mightily, </p>
<p class="poetry">it goes out to meet the weapons. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:22</span> It laughs at fear and is not dismayed;</p>
<p class="poetry">it does not shy away from the sword. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:23</span> On it the quiver rattles;</p>
<p class="poetry">the lance and javelin flash. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:24</span> In excitement and impatience it consumes the ground; </p>
<p class="poetry">it cannot stand still when the trumpet is blown. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:25</span> At the sound of the trumpet, it says, ‘Aha!’</p>
<p class="poetry">And from a distance it catches the scent of battle,</p>
<p class="poetry">the thunderous shouting of commanders, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the battle cries. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">39:26</span> “Is it by your understanding that the hawk soars, </p>
<p class="poetry">and spreads its wings toward the south? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:27</span> Is it at your command that the eagle soars,</p>
<p class="poetry">and builds its nest on high?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:28</span> It lives on a rock and spends the night there,</p>
<p class="poetry">on a rocky crag and a fortress. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:29</span> From there it spots its prey, </p>
<p class="poetry">its eyes gaze intently from a distance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:30</span> And its young ones devour the blood,</p>
<p class="poetry">and where the dead carcasses are, </p>
<p class="poetry">there it is.”</p>

</body>
</html>