<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Lamentations 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Lamentations<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The People of Jerusalem Pray</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:1</span>  O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, reflect on what has happened to us;</p>
<p class="poetry">consider and look at our disgrace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> Our inheritance is turned over to strangers;</p>
<p class="poetry">foreigners now occupy our homes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> We have become fatherless orphans;</p>
<p class="poetry">our mothers have become widows. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> We must pay money for our own water; </p>
<p class="poetry">we must buy our own wood at a steep price. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> We are pursued—they are breathing down our necks; </p>
<p class="poetry">we are weary and have no rest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> We have submitted to Egypt and Assyria</p>
<p class="poetry">in order to buy food to eat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> Our forefathers sinned and are dead, </p>
<p class="poetry">but we suffer their punishment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> Slaves rule over us;</p>
<p class="poetry">there is no one to rescue us from their power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> At the risk of our lives we get our food </p>
<p class="poetry">because robbers lurk in the wilderness.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> Our skin is as hot as an oven</p>
<p class="poetry">due to a fever from hunger. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> They raped women in Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">virgins in the towns of Judah. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> Princes were hung by their hands; </p>
<p class="poetry">elders were mistreated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> The young men perform menial labor; </p>
<p class="poetry">boys stagger from their labor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:14</span> The elders are gone from the city gate;</p>
<p class="poetry">the young men have stopped playing their music. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> Our hearts no longer have any joy; </p>
<p class="poetry">our dancing is turned to mourning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:16</span> The crown has fallen from our head;</p>
<p class="poetry">woe to us, for we have sinned! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:17</span> Because of this, our hearts are sick; </p>
<p class="poetry">because of these things, we can hardly see through our tears. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:18</span> For wild animals are prowling over Mount Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">which lies desolate. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:19</span> But you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, reign forever;</p>
<p class="poetry">your throne endures from generation to generation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:20</span> Why do you keep on forgetting us?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you forsake us so long? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:21</span> Bring us back to yourself, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, so that we may return to you;</p>
<p class="poetry">renew our life as in days before, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:22</span> unless you have utterly rejected us </p>
<p class="poetry">and are angry with us beyond measure. </p>

</body>
</html>