<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> God’s Spirit came upon Azariah son of Oded. <span class="verse">15:2</span> He met Asa and told him, “Listen to me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin! The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is with you when you are loyal to him. If you seek him, he will respond to you, but if you reject him, he will reject you. <span class="verse">15:3</span> For a long time Israel had not sought the one true God, or a priest to instruct them, or the law. <span class="verse">15:4</span> Because of their distress, they turned back to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel. They sought him and he responded to them. <span class="verse">15:5</span> In those days no one could travel safely, for total chaos had overtaken all the people of the surrounding lands. <span class="verse">15:6</span> One nation was crushed by another, and one city by another, for God caused them to be in great turmoil. <span class="verse">15:7</span> But as for you, be strong and don’t get discouraged, for your work will be rewarded.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:8</span> When Asa heard these words and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he was encouraged. He removed the detestable idols from the entire land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities he had seized in the Ephraimite hill country. He repaired the altar of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in front of the porch of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:9</span> He assembled all Judah and Benjamin, as well as the settlers from Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon who had come to live with them. Many people from Israel had come there to live when they saw that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God was with him. <span class="verse">15:10</span> They assembled in Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of Asa’s reign. <span class="verse">15:11</span> At that time they sacrificed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> some of the plunder they had brought back, including 700 head of cattle and 7,000 sheep. <span class="verse">15:12</span> They solemnly agreed to seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors with their whole heart and being. <span class="verse">15:13</span> Anyone who would not seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel would be executed, whether they were young or old, male or female. <span class="verse">15:14</span> They swore their allegiance to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, shouting their approval loudly and sounding trumpets and horns. <span class="verse">15:15</span> All Judah was happy about the oath, because they made the vow with their whole heart. They willingly sought the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and he responded to them. He made them secure on every side. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:16</span> King Asa also removed Maacah his grandmother from her position as queen mother because she had made a loathsome Asherah pole. Asa cut down her loathsome pole and crushed and burned it in the Kidron Valley. <span class="verse">15:17</span> The high places were not eliminated from Israel, yet Asa was wholeheartedly devoted to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> throughout his lifetime. <span class="verse">15:18</span> He brought the holy items that his father and he had made into God’s temple, including the silver, gold, and other articles. </p>

</body>
</html>