<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 37</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 37</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:1</span> At this also my heart pounds</p>
<p class="poetry">and leaps from its place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:2</span> Listen carefully to the thunder of his voice,</p>
<p class="poetry">to the rumbling that proceeds from his mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:3</span> Under the whole heaven he lets it go,</p>
<p class="poetry">even his lightning to the far corners of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:4</span> After that a voice roars;</p>
<p class="poetry">he thunders with an exalted voice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he does not hold back his lightning bolts </p>
<p class="poetry">when his voice is heard. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:5</span> God thunders with his voice in marvelous ways; </p>
<p class="poetry">he does great things beyond our understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:6</span> For to the snow he says, ‘Fall to earth,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the torrential rains, ‘Pour down.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:7</span> He causes everyone to stop working, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that all people may know his work. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:8</span> The wild animals go to their lairs,</p>
<p class="poetry">and in their dens they remain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:9</span> A tempest blows out from its chamber,</p>
<p class="poetry">icy cold from the driving winds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:10</span> The breath of God produces ice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the breadth of the waters freeze solid.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:11</span> He loads the clouds with moisture; </p>
<p class="poetry">he scatters his lightning through the clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:12</span> The clouds go round in circles,</p>
<p class="poetry">wheeling about according to his plans,</p>
<p class="poetry">to carry out all that he commands them</p>
<p class="poetry">over the face of the whole inhabited world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:13</span> Whether it is for punishment, </p>
<p class="poetry">or for his land,</p>
<p class="poetry">or for mercy, </p>
<p class="poetry">he causes it to find its mark. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">37:14</span> “Pay attention to this, Job!</p>
<p class="poetry">Stand still and consider the wonders God works.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:15</span> Do you know how God commands them, </p>
<p class="poetry">how he makes lightning flash in his storm cloud? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:16</span> Do you know about the balancing of the clouds,</p>
<p class="poetry">that wondrous activity of him who is perfect in knowledge? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:17</span> You, whose garments are hot</p>
<p class="poetry">when the earth is still because of the south wind,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:18</span> will you, with him, spread out the clouds,</p>
<p class="poetry">solid as a mirror of molten metal?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:19</span> Tell us what we should say to him.</p>
<p class="poetry">We cannot prepare a case </p>
<p class="poetry">because of the darkness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:20</span> Should he be informed that I want to speak?</p>
<p class="poetry">If a man speaks, surely he will be swallowed up!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:21</span> But now, the sun cannot be looked at —</p>
<p class="poetry">it is bright in the skies—</p>
<p class="poetry">after a wind passed and swept the clouds away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:22</span> From the north he comes in golden splendor; </p>
<p class="poetry">around God is awesome majesty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:23</span> As for the Almighty, we cannot attain to him!</p>
<p class="poetry">He is great in power,</p>
<p class="poetry">but justice and abundant righteousness he does not oppress. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:24</span> Therefore people fear him,</p>
<p class="poetry">for he does not regard all the wise in heart.” </p>

</body>
</html>