<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Wedding Night: Praise of the Bride </p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Oh, you are beautiful, my darling! </p>
<p class="poetry">Oh, you are beautiful!</p>
<p class="poetry">Your eyes behind your veil are like doves. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your hair is like a flock of female goats</p>
<p class="poetry">descending from Mount Gilead. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> Your teeth are like a flock of newly shorn sheep</p>
<p class="poetry">coming up from the washing place; </p>
<p class="poetry">each of them has a twin,</p>
<p class="poetry">and not one of them is missing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> Your lips are like a scarlet thread; </p>
<p class="poetry">your mouth is lovely.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your forehead behind your veil</p>
<p class="poetry">is like a slice of pomegranate. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Your neck is like the tower of David</p>
<p class="poetry">built with courses of stones; </p>
<p class="poetry">one thousand shields are hung on it—</p>
<p class="poetry">all shields of valiant warriors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> Your two breasts are like two fawns,</p>
<p class="poetry">twins of the gazelle</p>
<p class="poetry">grazing among the lilies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:6</span> Until the dawn arrives </p>
<p class="poetry">and the shadows flee,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will go up to the mountain of myrrh,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the hill of frankincense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> You are altogether beautiful, my darling!</p>
<p class="poetry">There is no blemish in you!</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Wedding Night: Beautiful as Lebanon</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> Come with me from Lebanon, my bride,</p>
<p class="poetry">come with me from Lebanon.</p>
<p class="poetry">Descend from the crest of Amana,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the top of Senir, the summit of Hermon,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the lions’ dens</p>
<p class="poetry">and the mountain haunts of the leopards. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:9</span> You have stolen my heart, my sister, my bride!</p>
<p class="poetry">You have stolen my heart with one glance of your eyes, </p>
<p class="poetry">with one jewel of your necklace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:10</span> How delightful is your love, my sister, my bride!</p>
<p class="poetry">How much better is your love than wine;</p>
<p class="poetry">the fragrance of your perfume is better than any spice! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Your lips drip sweetness like the honeycomb, my bride,</p>
<p class="poetry">honey and milk are under your tongue.</p>
<p class="poetry">The fragrance of your garments is like the fragrance of Lebanon. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Wedding Night: The Delightful Garden</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> You are a locked garden, my sister, my bride;</p>
<p class="poetry">you are an enclosed spring, a sealed-up fountain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:13</span> Your shoots are a royal garden full of pomegranates</p>
<p class="poetry">with choice fruits:</p>
<p class="poetry">henna with nard, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:14</span> nard and saffron,</p>
<p class="poetry">calamus and cinnamon with every kind of spice,</p>
<p class="poetry">myrrh and aloes with all the finest spices. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:15</span> You are a garden spring, </p>
<p class="poetry">a well of fresh water flowing down from Lebanon. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:16</span> Awake, O north wind; come, O south wind!</p>
<p class="poetry">Blow on my garden so that its fragrant spices may send out their sweet smell. </p>
<p class="poetry">May my beloved come into his garden</p>
<p class="poetry">and eat its delightful fruit! </p>

</body>
</html>