<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to Bildad </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:1</span> Then Job answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:2</span> “How long will you torment me </p>
<p class="poetry">and crush me with your words? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:3</span> These ten times you have been reproaching me; </p>
<p class="poetry">you are not ashamed to attack me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:4</span> But even if it were true that I have erred, </p>
<p class="poetry">my error remains solely my concern!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:5</span> If indeed you would exalt yourselves above me</p>
<p class="poetry">and plead my disgrace against me, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:6</span> know then that God has wronged me </p>
<p class="poetry">and encircled me with his net. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Abandonment and Affliction</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:7</span> “If I cry out, ‘Violence!’ </p>
<p class="poetry">I receive no answer; </p>
<p class="poetry">I cry for help, </p>
<p class="poetry">but there is no justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:8</span> He has blocked my way so I cannot pass,</p>
<p class="poetry">and has set darkness over my paths. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:9</span> He has stripped me of my honor</p>
<p class="poetry">and has taken the crown off my head. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:10</span> He tears me down on every side until I perish; </p>
<p class="poetry">he uproots my hope like an uprooted  tree. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:11</span> Thus his anger burns against me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he considers me among his enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:12</span> His troops advance together;</p>
<p class="poetry">they throw up a siege ramp against me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they camp around my tent. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Forsaken State</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:13</span> “He has put my relatives far from me;</p>
<p class="poetry">my acquaintances only turn away from me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:14</span> My kinsmen have failed me;</p>
<p class="poetry">my friends have forgotten me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:15</span> My guests and my servant girls </p>
<p class="poetry">consider me a stranger;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am a foreigner in their eyes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:16</span> I summon my servant, but he does not respond,</p>
<p class="poetry">even though I implore him with my own mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:17</span> My breath is repulsive to my wife;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am loathsome to my brothers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:18</span> Even youngsters have scorned me;</p>
<p class="poetry">when I get up, they scoff at me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:19</span> All my closest friends detest me;</p>
<p class="poetry">and those whom I love have turned against me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:20</span> My bones stick to my skin and my flesh; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have escaped alive with only the skin of my teeth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:21</span> Have pity on me, my friends, have pity on me,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the hand of God has struck me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:22</span> Why do you pursue me like God does? </p>
<p class="poetry">Will you never be satiated with my flesh? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Assurance of Vindication</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:23</span> “O that my words were written down!</p>
<p class="poetry">O that they were written on a scroll! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:24</span> O that with an iron chisel and with lead </p>
<p class="poetry">they were engraved in a rock forever! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:25</span> As for me, I know that my Redeemer lives,</p>
<p class="poetry">and that as the last </p>
<p class="poetry">he will stand upon the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:26</span> And after my skin has been destroyed, </p>
<p class="poetry">yet in my flesh I will see God, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:27</span> whom I will see for myself, </p>
<p class="poetry">and whom my own eyes will behold, </p>
<p class="poetry">and not another. </p>
<p class="poetry">My heart grows faint within me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:28</span> If you say, ‘How we will pursue him,</p>
<p class="poetry">since the root of the trouble is found in him!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:29</span> Fear the sword yourselves,</p>
<p class="poetry">for wrath brings the punishment by the sword,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that you may know </p>
<p class="poetry">that there is judgment.” </p>

</body>
</html>