<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judgment on the Mountains of Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">6:2</span> “Son of man, turn toward the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them. <span class="verse">6:3</span> Say, ‘Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says to the mountains and the hills, to the ravines and the valleys: I am bringing a sword against you, and I will destroy your high places. <span class="verse">6:4</span> Your altars will be ruined and your incense altars will be broken. I will throw down your slain in front of your idols. <span class="verse">6:5</span> I will place the corpses of the people of Israel in front of their idols, and I will scatter your bones around your altars. <span class="verse">6:6</span> In all your dwellings, the cities will be laid waste and the high places ruined so that your altars will be laid waste and ruined, your idols will be shattered and demolished, your incense altars will be broken down, and your works wiped out. <span class="verse">6:7</span> The slain will fall among you and then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:8</span> “‘But I will spare some of you. Some will escape the sword when you are scattered in foreign lands. <span class="verse">6:9</span> Then your survivors will remember me among the nations where they are exiled. They will realize how I was crushed by their unfaithful heart that turned from me and by their eyes that lusted after their idols. They will loathe themselves because of the evil they have done and because of all their abominable practices. <span class="verse">6:10</span> They will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; my threats to bring this catastrophe on them were not empty. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:11</span> “‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Clap your hands, stamp your feet, and say, “Ah!” because of all the evil, abominable practices of the house of Israel, for they will fall by the sword, famine, and pestilence. <span class="verse">6:12</span> The one far away will die by pestilence, the one close by will fall by the sword, and whoever is left and has escaped these will die by famine. I will fully vent my rage against them. <span class="verse">6:13</span> Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> when their dead lie among their idols around their altars, on every high hill and on all the mountaintops, under every green tree and every leafy oak —the places where they have offered fragrant incense to all their idols. <span class="verse">6:14</span> I will stretch out my hand against them and make the land a desolate waste from the wilderness to Riblah, in all the places where they live. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’” </p>

</body>
</html>