<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ephesians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ephesians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">New Life Individually</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> And although you were dead in your offenses and sins, <span class="verse">2:2</span> in which you formerly lived according to this world’s present path,  according to the ruler of the domain of the air, the ruler of the spirit that is now energizing the sons of disobedience, <span class="verse">2:3</span> among whom all of us also formerly lived out our lives in the cravings of our flesh, indulging the desires of the flesh and the mind, and were by nature children of wrath even as the rest… </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us, <span class="verse">2:5</span> even though we were dead in offenses, made us alive together with Christ—by grace you are saved! — <span class="verse">2:6</span> and he raised us up together with him and seated us together with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus, <span class="verse">2:7</span> to demonstrate in the coming ages the surpassing wealth of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">2:8</span> For by grace you are saved through faith, and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of God; <span class="verse">2:9</span> it is not from works, so that no one can boast. <span class="verse">2:10</span> For we are his creative work, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works that God prepared beforehand so we can do them. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">New Life Corporately</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Therefore remember that formerly you, the Gentiles in the flesh—who are called “uncircumcision” by the so-called “circumcision” that is performed on the body by human hands— <span class="verse">2:12</span> that you were at that time without the Messiah, alienated from the citizenship of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world. <span class="verse">2:13</span> But now in Christ Jesus you who used to be far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ. <span class="verse">2:14</span> For he is our peace, the one who made both groups into one and who destroyed the middle wall of partition, the hostility, <span class="verse">2:15</span> when he nullified in his flesh the law of commandments in decrees. He did this to create in himself one new man out of two, thus making peace, <span class="verse">2:16</span> and to reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, by which the hostility has been killed. <span class="verse">2:17</span> And he came and preached peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near, <span class="verse">2:18</span> so that through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father. <span class="verse">2:19</span> So then you are no longer foreigners and noncitizens, but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of God’s household, <span class="verse">2:20</span> because you have been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the cornerstone. <span class="verse">2:21</span> In him the whole building, being joined together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord, <span class="verse">2:22</span> in whom you also are being built together into a dwelling place of God in the Spirit. </p>

</body>
</html>