<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 92</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 92</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm; a song for the Sabbath day.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:1</span> It is fitting to thank the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to sing praises to your name, O Most High. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:2</span> It is fitting to proclaim your loyal love in the morning,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your faithfulness during the night, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:3</span> to the accompaniment of a ten-stringed instrument and a lyre,</p>
<p class="poetry">to the accompaniment of the meditative tone of the harp. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:4</span> For you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have made me happy by your work.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing for joy because of what you have done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:5</span> How great are your works, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">Your plans are very intricate! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:6</span> The spiritually insensitive do not recognize this;</p>
<p class="poetry">the fool does not understand this. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:7</span> When the wicked sprout up like grass,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all the evildoers glisten, </p>
<p class="poetry">it is so that they may be annihilated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:8</span> But you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, reign forever. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:9</span> Indeed, look at your enemies, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, look at how your enemies perish.</p>
<p class="poetry">All the evildoers are scattered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:10</span> You exalt my horn like that of a wild ox. </p>
<p class="poetry">I am covered with fresh oil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:11</span> I gloat in triumph over those who tried to ambush me; </p>
<p class="poetry">I hear the defeated cries of the evil foes who attacked me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:12</span> The godly grow like a palm tree;</p>
<p class="poetry">they grow high like a cedar in Lebanon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:13</span> Planted in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s house,</p>
<p class="poetry">they grow in the courts of our God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:14</span> They bear fruit even when they are old;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are filled with vitality and have many leaves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">92:15</span> So they proclaim that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my Protector,</p>
<p class="poetry">is just and never unfair. </p>

</body>
</html>