<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 47</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 47</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Babylon Will Fall</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:1</span> “Fall down! Sit in the dirt,</p>
<p class="poetry">O virgin daughter Babylon!</p>
<p class="poetry">Sit on the ground, not on a throne,</p>
<p class="poetry">O daughter of the Babylonians!</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, you will no longer be called delicate and pampered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:2</span> Pick up millstones and grind flour.</p>
<p class="poetry">Remove your veil,</p>
<p class="poetry">strip off your skirt,</p>
<p class="poetry">expose your legs,</p>
<p class="poetry">cross the streams. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:3</span> Let your naked body be exposed.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your shame will be on display! </p>
<p class="poetry">I will get revenge;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not have pity on anyone,” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:4</span> says our Protector—</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies is his name,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Holy One of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:5</span> “Sit silently! Go to a hiding place, </p>
<p class="poetry">O daughter of the Babylonians!</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, you will no longer be called ‘Queen of kingdoms.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:6</span> I was angry at my people;</p>
<p class="poetry">I defiled my special possession</p>
<p class="poetry">and handed them over to you.</p>
<p class="poetry">You showed them no mercy; </p>
<p class="poetry">you even placed a very heavy burden on old people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:7</span> You said,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘I will rule forever as permanent queen!’ </p>
<p class="poetry">You did not think about these things; </p>
<p class="poetry">you did not consider how it would turn out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:8</span> So now, listen to this,</p>
<p class="poetry">O one who lives so lavishly, </p>
<p class="poetry">who lives securely,</p>
<p class="poetry">who says to herself, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘I am unique! No one can compare to me! </p>
<p class="poetry">I will never have to live as a widow;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will never lose my children.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:9</span> Both of these will come upon you</p>
<p class="poetry">suddenly, in one day!</p>
<p class="poetry">You will lose your children and be widowed. </p>
<p class="poetry">You will be overwhelmed by these tragedies, </p>
<p class="poetry">despite your many incantations</p>
<p class="poetry">and your numerous amulets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:10</span> You were complacent in your evil deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">you thought, ‘No one sees me.’</p>
<p class="poetry">Your self-professed wisdom and knowledge lead you astray,</p>
<p class="poetry">when you say, ‘I am unique! No one can compare to me!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:11</span> Disaster will overtake you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will not know how to charm it away. </p>
<p class="poetry">Destruction will fall on you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will not be able to appease it.</p>
<p class="poetry">Calamity will strike you suddenly,</p>
<p class="poetry">before you recognize it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:12</span> Persist in trusting your amulets</p>
<p class="poetry">and your many incantations,</p>
<p class="poetry">which you have faithfully recited since your youth!</p>
<p class="poetry">Maybe you will be successful —</p>
<p class="poetry">maybe you will scare away disaster. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:13</span> You are tired out from listening to so much advice. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let them take their stand—</p>
<p class="poetry">the ones who see omens in the sky,</p>
<p class="poetry">who gaze at the stars,</p>
<p class="poetry">who make monthly predictions—</p>
<p class="poetry">let them rescue you from the disaster that is about to overtake you! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:14</span> Look, they are like straw,</p>
<p class="poetry">that the fire burns up;</p>
<p class="poetry">they cannot rescue themselves</p>
<p class="poetry">from the heat of the flames.</p>
<p class="poetry">There are no coals to warm them,</p>
<p class="poetry">no firelight to enjoy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:15</span> They will disappoint you, </p>
<p class="poetry">those you have so faithfully dealt with since your youth. </p>
<p class="poetry">Each strays off in his own direction, </p>
<p class="poetry">leaving no one to rescue you.”</p>

</body>
</html>