<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ordination of the Priests</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">8:2</span> “Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, the anointing oil, the sin offering bull, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread, <span class="verse">8:3</span> and assemble the whole congregation at the entrance of the Meeting Tent.” <span class="verse">8:4</span> So Moses did just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded him, and the congregation assembled at the entrance of the Meeting Tent. <span class="verse">8:5</span> Then Moses said to the congregation: “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has commanded to be done.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Clothing Aaron</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:6</span> So Moses brought Aaron and his sons forward and washed them with water. <span class="verse">8:7</span> Then he put the tunic on Aaron, wrapped the sash around him, and clothed him with the robe. Next he put the ephod on him and placed on him the decorated band of the ephod, and fastened the ephod closely to him with the band. <span class="verse">8:8</span> He then set the breastpiece on him and put the Urim and Thummim into the breastpiece. <span class="verse">8:9</span> Finally, he set the turban on his head and attached the gold plate, the holy diadem, to the front of the turban just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Anointing the Tabernacle and Aaron, and Clothing Aaron’s Sons</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:10</span> Then Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and everything in it, and so consecrated them. <span class="verse">8:11</span> Next he sprinkled some of it on the altar seven times and so anointed the altar, all its vessels, and the washbasin and its stand to consecrate them. <span class="verse">8:12</span> He then poured some of the anointing oil on the head of Aaron and anointed him to consecrate him. <span class="verse">8:13</span> Moses also brought forward Aaron’s sons, clothed them with tunics, wrapped sashes around them, and wrapped headbands on them just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Consecration Offerings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Then he brought near the sin offering bull and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the sin offering bull, <span class="verse">8:15</span> and he slaughtered it. Moses then took the blood and put it all around on the horns of the altar with his finger and purified the altar, and he poured out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar and so consecrated it to make atonement on it. <span class="verse">8:16</span> Then he took all the fat on the entrails, the protruding lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat, and Moses offered it all up in smoke on the altar, <span class="verse">8:17</span> but the rest of the bull—its hide, its flesh, and its dung—he completely burned up outside the camp just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:18</span> Then he presented the burnt offering ram and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram, <span class="verse">8:19</span> and he slaughtered it. Moses then splashed the blood against the altar’s sides. <span class="verse">8:20</span> Then he cut the ram into parts, and Moses offered the head, the parts, and the suet up in smoke, <span class="verse">8:21</span> but the entrails and the legs he washed with water, and Moses offered the whole ram up in smoke on the altar—it was a burnt offering for a soothing aroma, a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:22</span> Then he presented the second ram, the ram of ordination, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram <span class="verse">8:23</span> and he slaughtered it. Moses then took some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot. <span class="verse">8:24</span> Next he brought Aaron’s sons forward, and Moses put some of the blood on their right earlobes, on their right thumbs, and on the big toes of their right feet, and Moses splashed the rest of the blood against the altar’s sides. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:25</span> Then he took the fat (the fatty tail, all the fat on the entrails, the protruding lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat) and the right thigh, <span class="verse">8:26</span> and from the basket of unleavened bread that was before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> he took one unleavened loaf, one loaf of bread mixed with olive oil, and one wafer, and placed them on the fat parts and on the right thigh. <span class="verse">8:27</span> He then put all of them on the palms of Aaron and his sons, who waved them as a wave offering before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">8:28</span> Moses then took them from their palms and offered them up in smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering—they were an ordination offering for a soothing aroma; it was a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">8:29</span> Finally, Moses took the breast and waved it as a wave offering before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from the ram of ordination. It was Moses’ share just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Anointing Aaron, his Sons, and their Garments </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:30</span> Then Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood which was on the altar and sprinkled it on Aaron and his garments, and on his sons and his sons’ garments. So he consecrated Aaron, his garments, and his sons and his sons’ garments. <span class="verse">8:31</span> Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons, “Boil the meat at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, and there you are to eat it and the bread which is in the ordination offering basket, just as I have commanded, saying, ‘Aaron and his sons are to eat it,’ <span class="verse">8:32</span> but the remainder of the meat and the bread you must burn with fire. <span class="verse">8:33</span> And you must not go out from the entrance of the Meeting Tent for seven days, until the day when your days of ordination are completed, because you must be ordained over a seven-day period. <span class="verse">8:34</span> What has been done on this day the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has commanded to be done to make atonement for you. <span class="verse">8:35</span> You must reside at the entrance of the Meeting Tent day and night for seven days and keep the charge of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> so that you will not die, for this is what I have been commanded.” <span class="verse">8:36</span> So Aaron and his sons did all the things the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded through Moses. </p>

</body>
</html>