<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because Moab has committed three crimes —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four —I will not revoke my decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">They burned the bones of Edom’s king into lime. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> So I will set Moab on fire, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it will consume Kerioth’s fortresses.</p>
<p class="poetry">Moab will perish in the heat of battle </p>
<p class="poetry">amid war cries and the blaring of the ram’s horn. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> I will remove Moab’s leader; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will kill all Moab’s officials with him.”</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken!</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because Judah has committed three covenant transgressions —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four —I will not revoke my decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">They rejected the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s law; </p>
<p class="poetry">they did not obey his commands.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their false gods, </p>
<p class="poetry">to which their fathers were loyal, </p>
<p class="poetry">led them astray. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> So I will set Judah on fire,</p>
<p class="poetry">and it will consume Jerusalem’s fortresses.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Will Judge Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:6</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because Israel has committed three covenant transgressions —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four —I will not revoke my decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">They sold the innocent for silver, </p>
<p class="poetry">the needy for a pair of sandals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> They trample on the dirt-covered heads of the poor; </p>
<p class="poetry">they push the destitute away. </p>
<p class="poetry">A man and his father go to the same girl; </p>
<p class="poetry">in this way they show disrespect for my moral purity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> They stretch out on clothing seized as collateral; </p>
<p class="poetry">they do so right beside every altar!</p>
<p class="poetry">They drink wine bought with the fines they have levied;</p>
<p class="poetry">they do so right in the temple of their God! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> For Israel’s sake I destroyed the Amorites. </p>
<p class="poetry">They were as tall as cedars </p>
<p class="poetry">and as strong as oaks,</p>
<p class="poetry">but I destroyed the fruit on their branches </p>
<p class="poetry">and their roots in the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> I brought you up from the land of Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">I led you through the wilderness for forty years</p>
<p class="poetry">so you could take the Amorites’ land as your own.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> I made some of your sons prophets</p>
<p class="poetry">and some of your young men Nazirites. </p>
<p class="poetry">Is this not true, you Israelites?”</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> “But you made the Nazirites drink wine; </p>
<p class="poetry">you commanded the prophets, ‘Do not prophesy!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> Look! I will press you down,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a cart loaded down with grain presses down. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> Fast runners will find no place to hide; </p>
<p class="poetry">strong men will have no strength left; </p>
<p class="poetry">warriors will not be able to save their lives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> Archers will not hold their ground; </p>
<p class="poetry">fast runners will not save their lives,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor will those who ride horses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> Bravehearted warriors will run away naked in that day.”</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking. </p>

</body>
</html>