<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Human Government Demonstrates Limitations of Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Who is a wise person? Who knows the solution to a problem? </p>
<p class="poetry">A person’s wisdom brightens his appearance, and softens his harsh countenance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:2</span> Obey the king’s command, </p>
<p class="poetry">because you took an oath before God to be loyal to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:3</span> Do not rush out of the king’s presence in haste—do not delay when the matter is unpleasant, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he can do whatever he pleases. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:4</span> Surely the king’s authority is absolute; </p>
<p class="poetry">no one can say to him, “What are you doing?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:5</span> Whoever obeys his command will not experience harm,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a wise person knows the proper time and procedure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:6</span> For there is a proper time and procedure for every matter,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the oppression of the king is severe upon his victim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:7</span> Surely no one knows the future, </p>
<p class="poetry">and no one can tell another person what will happen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:8</span> Just as no one has power over the wind to restrain it, </p>
<p class="poetry">so no one has power over the day of his death.</p>
<p class="poetry">Just as no one can be discharged during the battle, </p>
<p class="poetry">so wickedness cannot rescue the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> While applying my mind to everything that happens in this world, I have seen all this:</p>
<p class="poetry">Sometimes one person dominates other people to their harm. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Contradictions to the Law of Retribution</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> Not only that, but I have seen the wicked approaching and entering the temple, </p>
<p class="poetry">and as they left the holy temple, they </p>
<p class="poetry">boasted in the city that they had done so.</p>
<p class="poetry">This also is an enigma. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:11</span> When a sentence is not executed at once against a crime, </p>
<p class="poetry">the human heart is encouraged to do evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> Even though a sinner might commit a hundred crimes and still live a long time, </p>
<p class="poetry">yet I know that it will go well with God-fearing people —for they stand in fear before him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:13</span> But it will not go well with the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor will they prolong their days like a shadow, </p>
<p class="poetry">because they do not stand in fear before God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Here is another enigma that occurs on earth:</p>
<p class="poetry">Sometimes there are righteous people who get what the wicked deserve, </p>
<p class="poetry">and sometimes there are wicked people who get what the righteous deserve. </p>
<p class="poetry">I said, “This also is an enigma.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Enjoy Life In Spite of Its Injustices</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:15</span> So I recommend the enjoyment of life, </p>
<p class="poetry">for there is nothing better on earth for a person to do except to eat, drink, and enjoy life. </p>
<p class="poetry">So joy will accompany him in his toil</p>
<p class="poetry">during the days of his life that God gives him on earth. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Limitations of Human Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:16</span> When I tried to gain wisdom</p>
<p class="poetry">and to observe the activity on earth—</p>
<p class="poetry">even though it prevents anyone from sleeping day or night —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:17</span> then I discerned all that God has done: </p>
<p class="poetry">No one really comprehends what happens on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">Despite all human efforts to discover it, no one can ever grasp it. </p>
<p class="poetry">Even if a wise person claimed that he understood,</p>
<p class="poetry">he would not really comprehend it. </p>

</body>
</html>