<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> After Rehoboam’s rule was established and solidified, he and all Israel rejected the law of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">12:2</span> Because they were unfaithful to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, in King Rehoboam’s fifth year, King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem. <span class="verse">12:3</span> He had 1,200 chariots, 60,000 horsemen, and an innumerable number of soldiers who accompanied him from Egypt, including Libyans, Sukkites, and Cushites. <span class="verse">12:4</span> He captured the fortified cities of Judah and marched against Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:5</span> Shemaiah the prophet visited Rehoboam and the leaders of Judah who were assembled in Jerusalem because of Shishak. He said to them, “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: ‘You have rejected me, so I have rejected you and will hand you over to Shishak.’” <span class="verse">12:6</span> The leaders of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is just.” <span class="verse">12:7</span> When the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> saw that they humbled themselves, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to Shemaiah: “They have humbled themselves, so I will not destroy them. I will deliver them soon. My anger will not be unleashed against Jerusalem through Shishak. <span class="verse">12:8</span> Yet they will become his subjects, so they can experience how serving me differs from serving the surrounding nations.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:9</span> King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem and took away the treasures of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and of the royal palace; he took everything, including the gold shields that Solomon had made. <span class="verse">12:10</span> King Rehoboam made bronze shields to replace them and assigned them to the officers of the royal guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace. <span class="verse">12:11</span> Whenever the king visited the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple, the royal guards carried them and then brought them back to the guardroom. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:12</span> So when Rehoboam humbled himself, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> relented from his anger and did not annihilate him; Judah experienced some good things. <span class="verse">12:13</span> King Rehoboam solidified his rule in Jerusalem; he was forty-one years old when he became king, and he ruled for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> chose from all the tribes of Israel to be his home. Rehoboam’s mother was an Ammonite named Naamah. <span class="verse">12:14</span> He did evil because he was not determined to follow the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:15</span> The events of Rehoboam’s reign, from start to finish, are recorded in the Annals of Shemaiah the Prophet and of Iddo the Seer that include genealogical records. There were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. <span class="verse">12:16</span> Then Rehoboam passed away and was buried in the City of David. His son Abijah replaced him as king. </p>

</body>
</html>