<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Luke 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Luke<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Brought Before Pilate </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> Then the whole group of them rose up and brought Jesus before Pilate. <span class="verse">23:2</span> They began to accuse him, saying, “We found this man subverting our nation, forbidding us to pay the tribute tax to Caesar and claiming that he himself is Christ, a king.” <span class="verse">23:3</span> So Pilate asked Jesus, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He replied, “You say so.” <span class="verse">23:4</span> Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, “I find no basis for an accusation against this man.” <span class="verse">23:5</span> But they persisted in saying, “He incites the people by teaching throughout all Judea. It started in Galilee and ended up here!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Brought Before Herod</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:6</span> Now when Pilate heard this, he asked whether the man was a Galilean. <span class="verse">23:7</span> When he learned that he was from Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him over to Herod, who also happened to be in Jerusalem at that time. <span class="verse">23:8</span> When Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad, for he had long desired to see him, because he had heard about him and was hoping to see him perform some miraculous sign. <span class="verse">23:9</span> So Herod questioned him at considerable length; Jesus gave him no answer. <span class="verse">23:10</span> The chief priests and the experts in the law were there, vehemently accusing him. <span class="verse">23:11</span> Even Herod with his soldiers treated him with contempt and mocked him. Then, dressing him in elegant clothes, Herod sent him back to Pilate. <span class="verse">23:12</span> That very day Herod and Pilate became friends with each other, for prior to this they had been enemies. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Brought Before the Crowd</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:13</span> Then Pilate called together the chief priests, the leaders, and the people, <span class="verse">23:14</span> and said to them, “You brought me this man as one who was misleading the people. When I examined him before you, I did not find this man guilty of anything you accused him of doing. <span class="verse">23:15</span> Neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us. Look, he has done nothing deserving death. <span class="verse">23:16</span> I will therefore have him flogged and release him.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:18</span> But they all shouted out together, “Take this man away! Release Barabbas for us!” <span class="verse">23:19</span> (This was a man who had been thrown into prison for an insurrection started in the city, and for murder.) <span class="verse">23:20</span> Pilate addressed them once again because he wanted to release Jesus. <span class="verse">23:21</span> But they kept on shouting, “Crucify, crucify him!” <span class="verse">23:22</span> A third time he said to them, “Why? What wrong has he done? I have found him guilty of no crime deserving death. I will therefore flog him and release him.” <span class="verse">23:23</span> But they were insistent, demanding with loud shouts that he be crucified. And their shouts prevailed. <span class="verse">23:24</span> So Pilate decided that their demand should be granted. <span class="verse">23:25</span> He released the man they asked for, who had been thrown in prison for insurrection and murder. But he handed Jesus over to their will. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Crucifixion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:26</span> As they led him away, they seized Simon of Cyrene, who was coming in from the country. They placed the cross on his back and made him carry it behind Jesus. <span class="verse">23:27</span> A great number of the people followed him, among them women who were mourning and wailing for him. <span class="verse">23:28</span> But Jesus turned to them and said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children. <span class="verse">23:29</span> For this is certain: The days are coming when they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, the wombs that never bore children, and the breasts that never nursed!’ <span class="verse">23:30</span> Then they will begin <i>to say to the mountains,</i> ‘<i>Fall on us!</i>’ <i>and</i> <i>to the hills,</i> ‘<i>Cover us!</i>’ <span class="verse">23:31</span> For if such things are done when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:32</span> Two other criminals were also led away to be executed with him. <span class="verse">23:33</span> So when they came to the place that is called “The Skull,” they crucified him there, along with the criminals, one on his right and one on his left. <span class="verse">23:34</span> [But Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they don’t know what they are doing.”] Then <i>they threw dice</i> <i>to divide his clothes</i>. <span class="verse">23:35</span> The people also stood there watching, but the leaders ridiculed him, saying, “He saved others. Let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, his chosen one!” <span class="verse">23:36</span> The soldiers also mocked him, coming up and offering him sour wine, <span class="verse">23:37</span> and saying, “If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself!” <span class="verse">23:38</span> There was also an inscription over him, “This is the king of the Jews.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:39</span> One of the criminals who was hanging there railed at him, saying, “Aren’t you the Christ? Save yourself and us!” <span class="verse">23:40</span> But the other rebuked him, saying, “Don’t you fear God, since you are under the same sentence of condemnation? <span class="verse">23:41</span> And we rightly so, for we are getting what we deserve for what we did, but this man has done nothing wrong.” <span class="verse">23:42</span> Then he said, “Jesus, remember me when you come in your kingdom.” <span class="verse">23:43</span> And Jesus said to him, “I tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:44</span> It was now about noon, and darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon, <span class="verse">23:45</span> because the sun’s light failed. The temple curtain was torn in two. <span class="verse">23:46</span> Then Jesus, calling out with a loud voice, said, “Father, <b><i>into</i></b> <b><i>your hands I commit my spirit!</i></b>” And after he said this he breathed his last. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:47</span> Now when the centurion saw what had happened, he praised God and said, “Certainly this man was innocent!” <span class="verse">23:48</span> And all the crowds that had assembled for this spectacle, when they saw what had taken place, returned home beating their breasts. <span class="verse">23:49</span> And all those who knew Jesus stood at a distance, and the women who had followed him from Galilee saw these things. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Burial</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:50</span> Now there was a man named Joseph who was a member of the council, a good and righteous man. <span class="verse">23:51</span> (He had not consented to their plan and action.) He was from the Judean town of Arimathea, and was looking forward to the kingdom of God. <span class="verse">23:52</span> He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. <span class="verse">23:53</span> Then he took it down, wrapped it in a linen cloth, and placed it in a tomb cut out of the rock, where no one had yet been buried. <span class="verse">23:54</span> It was the day of preparation and the Sabbath was beginning. <span class="verse">23:55</span> The women who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee followed, and they saw the tomb and how his body was laid in it. <span class="verse">23:56</span> Then they returned and prepared aromatic spices and perfumes. </p>
<p class="bodytext">On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment. </p>

</body>
</html>