<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 107</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 107</h2><p class="paragraphtitle"><b>Book 5<br />(Psalms 107-150)</b></p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:1</span> Give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for he is good,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his loyal love endures. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:2</span> Let those delivered by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> speak out, </p>
<p class="poetry">those whom he delivered from the power of the enemy, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:3</span> and gathered from foreign lands, </p>
<p class="poetry">from east and west,</p>
<p class="poetry">from north and south. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:4</span> They wandered through the wilderness, in a wasteland; </p>
<p class="poetry">they found no road to a city in which to live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:5</span> They were hungry and thirsty;</p>
<p class="poetry">they fainted from exhaustion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:6</span> They cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in their distress;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivered them from their troubles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:7</span> He led them on a level road, </p>
<p class="poetry">that they might find a city in which to live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:8</span> Let them give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for his loyal love,</p>
<p class="poetry">and for the amazing things he has done for people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:9</span> For he has satisfied those who thirst, </p>
<p class="poetry">and those who hunger he has filled with food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:10</span> They sat in utter darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">bound in painful iron chains, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:11</span> because they had rebelled against God’s commands, </p>
<p class="poetry">and rejected the instructions of the Most High. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:12</span> So he used suffering to humble them; </p>
<p class="poetry">they stumbled and no one helped them up.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:13</span> They cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in their distress;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivered them from their troubles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:14</span> He brought them out of the utter darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">and tore off their shackles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:15</span> Let them give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for his loyal love,</p>
<p class="poetry">and for the amazing things he has done for people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:16</span> For he shattered the bronze gates,</p>
<p class="poetry">and hacked through the iron bars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:17</span> They acted like fools in their rebellious ways, </p>
<p class="poetry">and suffered because of their sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:18</span> They lost their appetite for all food, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they drew near the gates of death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:19</span> They cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in their distress;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivered them from their troubles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:20</span> He sent them an assuring word and healed them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he rescued them from the pits where they were trapped. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:21</span> Let them give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for his loyal love,</p>
<p class="poetry">and for the amazing things he has done for people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:22</span> Let them present thank offerings,</p>
<p class="poetry">and loudly proclaim what he has done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:23</span>  Some traveled on the sea in ships,</p>
<p class="poetry">and carried cargo over the vast waters. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:24</span> They witnessed the acts of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">his amazing feats on the deep water.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:25</span> He gave the order for a windstorm, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it stirred up the waves of the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:26</span> They reached up to the sky,</p>
<p class="poetry">then dropped into the depths.</p>
<p class="poetry">The sailors’ strength left them because the danger was so great. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:27</span> They swayed and staggered like drunks,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all their skill proved ineffective. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:28</span> They cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in their distress;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivered them from their troubles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:29</span> He calmed the storm, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the waves grew silent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:30</span> The sailors rejoiced because the waves grew quiet,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he led them to the harbor they desired. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:31</span> Let them give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for his loyal love,</p>
<p class="poetry">and for the amazing things he has done for people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:32</span> Let them exalt him in the assembly of the people.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let them praise him in the place where the leaders preside. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:33</span> He turned streams into a desert,</p>
<p class="poetry">springs of water into arid land, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:34</span> and a fruitful land into a barren place, </p>
<p class="poetry">because of the sin of its inhabitants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:35</span> As for his people, he turned a desert into a pool of water,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a dry land into springs of water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:36</span> He allowed the hungry to settle there,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they established a city in which to live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:37</span> They cultivated fields,</p>
<p class="poetry">and planted vineyards,</p>
<p class="poetry">which yielded a harvest of fruit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:38</span> He blessed them so that they became very numerous.</p>
<p class="poetry">He would not allow their cattle to decrease in number. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:39</span> As for their enemies, they decreased in number and were beaten down,</p>
<p class="poetry">because of painful distress and suffering. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:40</span> He would pour contempt upon princes,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he made them wander in a wasteland with no road. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:41</span> Yet he protected the needy from oppression,</p>
<p class="poetry">and cared for his families like a flock of sheep.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:42</span> When the godly see this, they rejoice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and every sinner shuts his mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">107:43</span> Whoever is wise, let him take note of these things.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let them consider the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s acts of loyal love. </p>

</body>
</html>