<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Coming Leadership Crisis</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Look, the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies </p>
<p class="poetry">is about to remove from Jerusalem and Judah</p>
<p class="poetry">every source of security, including </p>
<p class="poetry">all the food and water, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> the mighty men and warriors,</p>
<p class="poetry">judges and prophets,</p>
<p class="poetry">omen readers and leaders, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> captains of groups of fifty,</p>
<p class="poetry">the respected citizens, </p>
<p class="poetry">advisers and those skilled in magical arts, </p>
<p class="poetry">and those who know incantations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, “I will make youths their officials;</p>
<p class="poetry">malicious young men will rule over them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> The people will treat each other harshly;</p>
<p class="poetry">men will oppose each other;</p>
<p class="poetry">neighbors will fight. </p>
<p class="poetry">Youths will proudly defy the elderly</p>
<p class="poetry">and riffraff will challenge those who were once respected. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> Indeed, a man will grab his brother</p>
<p class="poetry">right in his father’s house and say, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘You own a coat—</p>
<p class="poetry">you be our leader!</p>
<p class="poetry">This heap of ruins will be under your control.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> At that time the brother will shout, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘I am no doctor, </p>
<p class="poetry">I have no food or coat in my house;</p>
<p class="poetry">don’t make me a leader of the people!’” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> Jerusalem certainly stumbles,</p>
<p class="poetry">Judah falls,</p>
<p class="poetry">for their words and their actions offend the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; </p>
<p class="poetry">they rebel against his royal authority. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> The look on their faces testifies to their guilt; </p>
<p class="poetry">like the people of Sodom they openly boast of their sin. </p>
<p class="poetry">Woe to them! </p>
<p class="poetry">For they bring disaster on themselves.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> Tell the innocent it will go well with them, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they will be rewarded for what they have done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> Woe to the wicked sinners!</p>
<p class="poetry">For they will get exactly what they deserve. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Oppressors treat my people cruelly;</p>
<p class="poetry">creditors rule over them. </p>
<p class="poetry">My people, your leaders mislead you;</p>
<p class="poetry">they give you confusing directions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> takes his position to judge;</p>
<p class="poetry">he stands up to pass sentence on his people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> comes to pronounce judgment </p>
<p class="poetry">on the leaders of his people and their officials.</p>
<p class="poetry">He says, “It is you who have ruined the vineyard! </p>
<p class="poetry">You have stashed in your houses what you have stolen from the poor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> Why do you crush my people</p>
<p class="poetry">and grind the faces of the poor?” </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has spoken.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Washing Away Impurity</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says,</p>
<p class="poetry">“The women of Zion are proud.</p>
<p class="poetry">They walk with their heads high </p>
<p class="poetry">and flirt with their eyes.</p>
<p class="poetry">They skip along </p>
<p class="poetry">and the jewelry on their ankles jingles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> So the Lord will afflict the foreheads of Zion’s women with skin diseases; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will make the front of their heads bald.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:18</span>  At that time the Lord will remove their beautiful ankle jewelry, neck ornaments, crescent-shaped ornaments, <span class="verse">3:19</span> earrings, bracelets, veils, <span class="verse">3:20</span> headdresses, ankle ornaments, sashes, sachets, amulets, <span class="verse">3:21</span> rings, nose rings, <span class="verse">3:22</span> festive dresses, robes, shawls, purses, <span class="verse">3:23</span> garments, vests, head coverings, and gowns. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:24</span> A putrid stench will replace the smell of spices, </p>
<p class="poetry">a rope will replace a belt,</p>
<p class="poetry">baldness will replace braided locks of hair,</p>
<p class="poetry">a sackcloth garment will replace a fine robe,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a prisoner’s brand will replace beauty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:25</span> Your men will fall by the sword,</p>
<p class="poetry">your strong men will die in battle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:26</span> Her gates will mourn and lament;</p>
<p class="poetry">deprived of her people, she will sit on the ground. </p>

</body>
</html>