<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prophecy Against the King of Tyre</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">28:2</span> “Son of man, say to the prince of Tyre, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: </p>
<p class="poetry">“‘Your heart is proud and you said, “I am a god; </p>
<p class="poetry">I sit in the seat of gods, in the heart of the seas”—</p>
<p class="poetry">yet you are a man and not a god, </p>
<p class="poetry">though you think you are godlike. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:3</span> Look, you are wiser than Daniel; </p>
<p class="poetry">no secret is hidden from you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:4</span> By your wisdom and understanding you have gained wealth for yourself;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have amassed gold and silver in your treasuries. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:5</span> By your great skill in trade you have increased your wealth,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your heart is proud because of your wealth. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">28:6</span> “‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">Because you think you are godlike, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:7</span> I am about to bring foreigners against you, the most terrifying of nations. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will draw their swords against the grandeur made by your wisdom, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they will defile your splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:8</span> They will bring you down to the Pit, and you will die violently in the heart of the seas. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:9</span> Will you still say, “I am a god,” before the one who kills you—</p>
<p class="poetry">though you are a man and not a god—</p>
<p class="poetry">when you are in the power of those who wound you? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:10</span> You will die the death of the uncircumcised by the hand of foreigners;</p>
<p class="poetry">for I have spoken, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">28:12</span> “Son of man, sing a lament for the king of Tyre, and say to him, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: </p>
<p class="poetry">“‘You were the sealer of perfection, </p>
<p class="poetry">full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:13</span> You were in Eden, the garden of God. </p>
<p class="poetry">Every precious stone was your covering,</p>
<p class="poetry">the ruby, topaz, and emerald,</p>
<p class="poetry">the chrysolite, onyx, and jasper,</p>
<p class="poetry">the sapphire, turquoise, and beryl; </p>
<p class="poetry">your settings and mounts were made of gold.</p>
<p class="poetry">On the day you were created they were prepared. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:14</span> I placed you there with an anointed guardian cherub; </p>
<p class="poetry">you were on the holy mountain of God;</p>
<p class="poetry">you walked about amidst fiery stones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:15</span> You were blameless in your behavior from the day you were created,</p>
<p class="poetry">until sin was discovered in you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:16</span> In the abundance of your trade you were filled with violence, and you sinned; </p>
<p class="poetry">so I defiled you and banished you from the mountain of God—</p>
<p class="poetry">the guardian cherub expelled you from the midst of the stones of fire. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:17</span> Your heart was proud because of your beauty;</p>
<p class="poetry">you corrupted your wisdom on account of your splendor.</p>
<p class="poetry">I threw you down to the ground; </p>
<p class="poetry">I placed you before kings, that they might see you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:18</span> By the multitude of your iniquities, through the sinfulness of your trade,</p>
<p class="poetry">you desecrated your sanctuaries.</p>
<p class="poetry">So I drew fire out from within you; </p>
<p class="poetry">it consumed you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I turned you to ashes on the earth </p>
<p class="poetry">before the eyes of all who saw you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:19</span> All who know you among the peoples are shocked at you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have become terrified and will be no more.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prophecy Against Sidon</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:20</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">28:21</span> “Son of man, turn toward Sidon and prophesy against it. <span class="verse">28:22</span> Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“‘Look, I am against you, Sidon, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will magnify myself in your midst.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> </p>
<p class="poetry">when I execute judgments on her </p>
<p class="poetry">and reveal my sovereign power in her.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:23</span> I will send a plague into the city and bloodshed into its streets;</p>
<p class="poetry">the slain will fall within it, by the sword that attacks it from every side.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:24</span> “‘No longer will Israel suffer from the sharp briers or painful thorns of all who surround and scorn them. Then they will know that I am the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:25</span> “‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: When I regather the house of Israel from the peoples where they are dispersed, I will reveal my sovereign power over them in the sight of the nations, and they will live in their land that I gave to my servant Jacob. <span class="verse">28:26</span> They will live securely in it; they will build houses and plant vineyards. They will live securely when I execute my judgments on all those who scorn them and surround them. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God.’” </p>

</body>
</html>