<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Restoration of the True People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> Ask the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for rain in the season of the late spring rains —the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who causes thunderstorms—and he will give everyone showers of rain and green growth in the field. <span class="verse">10:2</span> For the household gods have spoken wickedness, the soothsayers have seen a lie, and the dreamers have disclosed emptiness and give comfort in vain. Therefore the people set out like sheep and become scattered because they have no shepherd. <span class="verse">10:3</span> “I am enraged at the shepherds and will punish the lead goats.</p>
<p class="bodytext">“For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has brought blessing to his flock, the house of Judah, and will transform them into his majestic warhorse. <span class="verse">10:4</span> From him will come the cornerstone, the wall peg, the battle bow, and every ruler. <span class="verse">10:5</span> And they will be like warriors trampling the mud of the streets in battle. They will fight, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be with them, and will defeat the enemy cavalry. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:6</span> “I (says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>) will strengthen the kingdom of Judah and deliver the people of Joseph and will bring them back because of my compassion for them. They will be as though I had never rejected them, for I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God, and therefore I will hear them. <span class="verse">10:7</span> The Ephraimites will be like warriors and will rejoice as if they had drunk wine. Their children will see it and rejoice; they will celebrate in the things of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">10:8</span> I will signal for them and gather them, for I have already redeemed them; then they will become as numerous as they were before. <span class="verse">10:9</span> Though I scatter them among the nations, they will remember in far-off places—they and their children will survive and return. <span class="verse">10:10</span> I will bring them back from Egypt and gather them from Assyria. I will bring them to the lands of Gilead and Lebanon, and there will not be enough room for them. <span class="verse">10:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will cross the sea of storms and will calm its turbulence. The depths of the Nile will dry up, the pride of Assyria will be humbled, and the domination of Egypt will be no more. <span class="verse">10:12</span> Thus I will strengthen them by my power, and they will walk about in my name,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>