<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Exodus 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Exodus<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing during Bondage in Egypt</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span>  These are the names of the sons of Israel who entered Egypt—each man with his household entered with Jacob: <span class="verse">1:2</span> Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, <span class="verse">1:3</span> Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, <span class="verse">1:4</span> Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher. <span class="verse">1:5</span> All the people who were directly descended from Jacob numbered seventy. But Joseph was already in Egypt, <span class="verse">1:6</span> and in time Joseph and his brothers and all that generation died. <span class="verse">1:7</span> The Israelites, however, were fruitful, increased greatly, multiplied, and became extremely strong, so that the land was filled with them.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:8</span> Then a new king, who did not know about Joseph, came to power over Egypt. <span class="verse">1:9</span> He said to his people, “Look at the Israelite people, more numerous and stronger than we are! <span class="verse">1:10</span> Come, let’s deal wisely with them. Otherwise they will continue to multiply, and if a war breaks out, they will ally themselves with our enemies and fight against us and leave the country.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:11</span> So they put foremen over the Israelites to oppress them with hard labor. As a result they built Pithom and Rameses as store cities for Pharaoh. <span class="verse">1:12</span> But the more the Egyptians oppressed them, the more they multiplied and spread. As a result the Egyptians loathed the Israelites, <span class="verse">1:13</span> and they made the Israelites serve rigorously. <span class="verse">1:14</span> They made their lives bitter by hard service with mortar and bricks and by all kinds of service in the fields. Every kind of service the Israelites were required to give was rigorous. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:15</span> The king of Egypt said to the Hebrew midwives, one of whom was named Shiphrah and the other Puah, <span class="verse">1:16</span>  “When you assist the Hebrew women in childbirth, observe at the delivery: If it is a son, kill him, but if it is a daughter, she may live.” <span class="verse">1:17</span> But the midwives feared God and did not do what the king of Egypt had told them; they let the boys live. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:18</span> Then the king of Egypt summoned the midwives and said to them, “Why have you done this and let the boys live?” <span class="verse">1:19</span> The midwives said to Pharaoh, “Because the Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women—for the Hebrew women are vigorous; they give birth before the midwife gets to them!” <span class="verse">1:20</span> So God treated the midwives well, and the people multiplied and became very strong. <span class="verse">1:21</span> And because the midwives feared God, he made households for them.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:22</span> Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, “All sons that are born you must throw into the river, but all daughters you may let live.” </p>

</body>
</html>