<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Proverbs of Solomon Collected by Hezekiah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span> These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of King Hezekiah of Judah copied: </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">25:2</span> It is the glory of God to conceal a matter,</p>
<p class="poetry">and it is the glory of a king to search out a matter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:3</span> As the heaven is high and the earth is deep</p>
<p class="poetry">so the hearts of kings are unsearchable. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:4</span> Remove the dross from the silver,</p>
<p class="poetry">and material for the silversmith will emerge; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:5</span> remove the wicked from before the king, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his throne will be established in righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:6</span> Do not honor yourself before the king,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not stand in the place of great men;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:7</span> for it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,” </p>
<p class="poetry">than to put you lower before a prince,</p>
<p class="poetry">whom your eyes have seen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:8</span> Do not go out hastily to litigation, </p>
<p class="poetry">or what will you do afterward</p>
<p class="poetry">when your neighbor puts you to shame? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:9</span> When you argue a case with your neighbor,</p>
<p class="poetry">do not reveal the secret of another person, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:10</span> lest the one who hears it put you to shame</p>
<p class="poetry">and your infamy will never go away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:11</span> Like apples of gold in settings of silver, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is a word skillfully spoken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:12</span> Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is a wise reprover to the ear of the one who listens. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:13</span> Like the cold of snow in the time of harvest, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is a faithful messenger to those who send him,</p>
<p class="poetry">for he refreshes the heart of his masters. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:14</span> Like cloudy skies and wind that produce no rain, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is the one who boasts of a gift not given. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:15</span> Through patience a ruler can be persuaded, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a soft tongue can break a bone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:16</span> You have found honey—eat only what is sufficient for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">lest you become stuffed with it and vomit it up. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:17</span> Don’t set foot too frequently in your neighbor’s house,</p>
<p class="poetry">lest he become weary of you and hate you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:18</span> Like a club or a sword or a sharp arrow, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is the one who testifies against his neighbor as a false witness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:19</span> Like a bad tooth or a foot out of joint, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is confidence in an unfaithful person at the time of trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:20</span> Like one who takes off a garment on a cold day, </p>
<p class="poetry">or like vinegar poured on soda, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is one who sings songs to a heavy heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:21</span> If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat,</p>
<p class="poetry">and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:22</span> for you will heap coals of fire on his head, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will reward you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:23</span> The north wind brings forth rain,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a gossiping tongue brings forth an angry look. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:24</span> It is better to live on a corner of the housetop</p>
<p class="poetry">than in a house in company with a quarrelsome wife. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:25</span> Like cold water to a weary person, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is good news from a distant land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:26</span> Like a muddied spring and a polluted well,</p>
<p class="poetry">so is a righteous person who gives way before the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:27</span> It is not good to eat too much honey,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor is it honorable for people to seek their own glory. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:28</span> Like a city that is broken down and without a wall,</p>
<p class="poetry">so is a person who cannot control his temper. </p>

</body>
</html>