<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 33</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 33</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Restore Zion</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:1</span> The destroyer is as good as dead, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who have not been destroyed!</p>
<p class="poetry">The deceitful one is as good as dead, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one whom others have not deceived!</p>
<p class="poetry">When you are through destroying, you will be destroyed;</p>
<p class="poetry">when you finish deceiving, others will deceive you! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:2</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, be merciful to us! We wait for you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Give us strength each morning. </p>
<p class="poetry">Deliver us when distress comes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:3</span> The nations run away when they hear a loud noise; </p>
<p class="poetry">the nations scatter when you spring into action! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:4</span> Your plunder disappears as if locusts were eating it; </p>
<p class="poetry">they swarm over it like locusts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is exalted, </p>
<p class="poetry">indeed, he lives in heaven; </p>
<p class="poetry">he fills Zion with justice and fairness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:6</span> He is your constant source of stability; </p>
<p class="poetry">he abundantly provides safety and great wisdom; </p>
<p class="poetry">he gives all this to those who fear him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:7</span> Look, ambassadors cry out in the streets;</p>
<p class="poetry">messengers sent to make peace weep bitterly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:8</span> Highways are empty, </p>
<p class="poetry">there are no travelers. </p>
<p class="poetry">Treaties are broken, </p>
<p class="poetry">witnesses are despised, </p>
<p class="poetry">human life is treated with disrespect. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:9</span> The land dries up and withers away;</p>
<p class="poetry">the forest of Lebanon shrivels up and decays.</p>
<p class="poetry">Sharon is like the arid rift valley; </p>
<p class="poetry">Bashan and Carmel are parched. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:10</span> “Now I will rise up,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">“Now I will exalt myself;</p>
<p class="poetry">now I will magnify myself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:11</span> You conceive straw, </p>
<p class="poetry">you give birth to chaff;</p>
<p class="poetry">your breath is a fire that destroys you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:12</span> The nations will be burned to ashes; </p>
<p class="poetry">like thorn bushes that have been cut down, they will be set on fire. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:13</span> You who are far away, listen to what I have done!</p>
<p class="poetry">You who are close by, recognize my strength.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:14</span> Sinners are afraid in Zion;</p>
<p class="poetry">panic grips the godless. </p>
<p class="poetry">They say, “Who among us can coexist with destructive fire?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who among us can coexist with unquenchable fire?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:15</span> The one who lives uprightly </p>
<p class="poetry">and speaks honestly;</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who refuses to profit from oppressive measures</p>
<p class="poetry">and rejects a bribe; </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who does not plot violent crimes </p>
<p class="poetry">and does not seek to harm others —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:16</span> this is the person who will live in a secure place; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will find safety in the rocky, mountain strongholds; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will have food</p>
<p class="poetry">and a constant supply of water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:17</span> You will see a king in his splendor; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will see a wide land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:18</span> Your mind will recall the terror you experienced, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will ask yourselves, “Where is the scribe?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where is the one who weighs the money?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where is the one who counts the towers?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:19</span> You will no longer see a defiant people</p>
<p class="poetry">whose language you do not comprehend, </p>
<p class="poetry">whose derisive speech you do not understand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:20</span> Look at Zion, the city where we hold religious festivals!</p>
<p class="poetry">You will see Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry">a peaceful settlement,</p>
<p class="poetry">a tent that stays put; </p>
<p class="poetry">its stakes will never be pulled up;</p>
<p class="poetry">none of its ropes will snap in two. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:21</span> Instead the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will rule there as our mighty king. </p>
<p class="poetry">Rivers and wide streams will flow through it; </p>
<p class="poetry">no war galley will enter; </p>
<p class="poetry">no large ships will sail through. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:22</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our ruler,</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our  commander,</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our king—</p>
<p class="poetry">he will deliver us.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:23</span> Though at this time your ropes are slack, </p>
<p class="poetry">the  mast is not secured, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the sail is not unfurled,</p>
<p class="poetry">at that time you will divide up a great quantity of loot; </p>
<p class="poetry">even the lame will drag off plunder. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:24</span> No resident of Zion will say, “I am ill”;</p>
<p class="poetry">the people who live there will have their sin forgiven. </p>

</body>
</html>