<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 9</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>alumoth-labben</i> style; a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:1</span> I will thank the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with all my heart!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will tell about all your amazing deeds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:2</span> I will be happy and rejoice in you.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to you, O Most High. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:3</span> When my enemies turn back,</p>
<p class="poetry">they trip and are defeated before you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:4</span> For you defended my just cause; </p>
<p class="poetry">from your throne you pronounced a just decision. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:5</span> You terrified the nations with your battle cry. </p>
<p class="poetry">You destroyed the wicked; </p>
<p class="poetry">you permanently wiped out all memory of them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:6</span> The enemy’s cities have been reduced to permanent ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry">You destroyed their cities; </p>
<p class="poetry">all memory of the enemies has perished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:7</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rules forever;</p>
<p class="poetry">he reigns in a just manner. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:8</span> He judges the world fairly;</p>
<p class="poetry">he makes just legal decisions for the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:9</span> Consequently the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> provides safety for the oppressed; </p>
<p class="poetry">he provides safety in times of trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:10</span> Your loyal followers trust in you, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do not abandon those who seek your help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:11</span> Sing praises to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who rules in Zion.</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell the nations what he has done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:12</span> For the one who takes revenge against murderers took notice of the oppressed; </p>
<p class="poetry">he did not overlook their cry for help </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:13</span> when they prayed: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Have mercy on me, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">See how I am oppressed by those who hate me, </p>
<p class="poetry">O one who can snatch me away from the gates of death! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:14</span> Then I will tell about all your praiseworthy acts; </p>
<p class="poetry">in the gates of Daughter Zion I will rejoice because of your deliverance.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:15</span> The nations fell into the pit they had made;</p>
<p class="poetry">their feet were caught in the net they had hidden. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:16</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> revealed himself;</p>
<p class="poetry">he accomplished justice.</p>
<p class="poetry">The wicked were ensnared by their own actions. (<i>Higgaion</i>. <i>Selah</i>) </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:17</span> The wicked are turned back and sent to Sheol; </p>
<p class="poetry">this is the destiny of all the nations that ignore God, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:18</span> for the needy are not permanently ignored, </p>
<p class="poetry">the hopes of the oppressed are not forever dashed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:19</span> Rise up, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t let men be defiant. </p>
<p class="poetry">May the nations be judged in your presence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:20</span> Terrify them, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let the nations know they are mere mortals. (Selah)</p>

</body>
</html>