<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Levi’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> (5:27) The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:2</span> The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:3</span> The children of Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Miriam.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:4</span> Eleazar was the father of Phinehas, and Phinehas was the father of Abishua. <span class="verse">6:5</span> Abishua was the father of Bukki, and Bukki was the father of Uzzi. <span class="verse">6:6</span> Uzzi was the father of Zerahiah, and Zerahiah was the father of Meraioth. <span class="verse">6:7</span> Meraioth was the father of Amariah, and Amariah was the father of Ahitub. <span class="verse">6:8</span> Ahitub was the father of Zadok, and Zadok was the father of Ahimaaz. <span class="verse">6:9</span> Ahimaaz was the father of Azariah, and Azariah was the father of Johanan. <span class="verse">6:10</span> Johanan was the father of Azariah, who served as a priest in the temple Solomon built in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">6:11</span> Azariah was the father of Amariah, and Amariah was the father of Ahitub. <span class="verse">6:12</span> Ahitub was the father of Zadok, and Zadok was the father of Shallum. <span class="verse">6:13</span> Shallum was the father of Hilkiah, and Hilkiah was the father of Azariah. <span class="verse">6:14</span> Azariah was the father of Seraiah, and Seraiah was the father of Jehozadak. <span class="verse">6:15</span> Jehozadak went into exile when the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> sent the people of Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:16</span> (6:1) The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:17</span> These are the names of the sons Gershom: Libni and Shimei. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:18</span> The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:19</span> The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi.</p>
<p class="bodytext">These are the clans of the Levites by their families. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:20</span> To Gershom: his son Libni, his son Jahath, his son Zimmah, <span class="verse">6:21</span> his son Joah, his son Iddo, his son Zerah, and his son Jeatherai. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:22</span> The sons of Kohath: his son Amminadab, his son Korah, his son Assir, <span class="verse">6:23</span> his son Elkanah, his son Ebiasaph, his son Assir, <span class="verse">6:24</span> his son Tahath, his son Uriel, his son Uzziah, and his son Shaul. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:25</span> The sons of Elkanah: Amasai, Ahimoth, <span class="verse">6:26</span> his son Elkanah, his son Zophai, his son Nahath, <span class="verse">6:27</span> his son Eliab, his son Jeroham, and his son Elkanah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:28</span> The sons of Samuel: Joel the firstborn and Abijah the second oldest.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:29</span> The descendants of Merari: Mahli, his son Libni, his son Shimei, his son Uzzah, <span class="verse">6:30</span> his son Shimea, his son Haggiah, and his son Asaiah. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Professional Musicians</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:31</span> These are the men David put in charge of music in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sanctuary, after the ark was placed there. <span class="verse">6:32</span> They performed music before the sanctuary of the meeting tent until Solomon built the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple in Jerusalem. They carried out their tasks according to regulations. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:33</span> These are the ones who served along with their sons:</p>
<p class="bodytext">From the Kohathites: Heman the musician, son of Joel, son of Samuel, <span class="verse">6:34</span> son of Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Eliel, son of Toah, <span class="verse">6:35</span> son of Zuph, son of Elkanah, son of Mahath, son of Amasai, <span class="verse">6:36</span> son of Elkanah, son of Joel, son of Azariah, son of Zephaniah, <span class="verse">6:37</span> son of Tahath, son of Assir, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, <span class="verse">6:38</span> son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, son of Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:39</span> Serving beside him was his fellow Levite Asaph, son of Berechiah, son of Shimea, <span class="verse">6:40</span> son of Michael, son of Baaseiah, son of Malkijah, <span class="verse">6:41</span> son of Ethni, son of Zerah, son of Adaiah, <span class="verse">6:42</span> son of Ethan, son of Zimmah, son of Shimei, <span class="verse">6:43</span> son of Jahath, son of Gershom, son of Levi. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:44</span> Serving beside them were their fellow Levites, the descendants of Merari, led by Ethan, son of Kishi, son of Abdi, son of Malluch, <span class="verse">6:45</span> son of Hashabiah, son of Amaziah, son of Hilkiah, <span class="verse">6:46</span> son of Amzi, son of Bani, son of Shemer, <span class="verse">6:47</span> son of Mahli, son of Mushi, son of Merari, son of Levi. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:48</span> The rest of their fellow Levites were assigned to perform the remaining tasks at God’s sanctuary. <span class="verse">6:49</span> But Aaron and his descendants offered sacrifices on the altar for burnt offerings and on the altar for incense as they had been assigned to do in the Most Holy Sanctuary. They made atonement for Israel, just as God’s servant Moses had ordered. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:50</span> These were the descendants of Aaron:</p>
<p class="bodytext">His son Eleazar, his son Phinehas, his son Abishua, <span class="verse">6:51</span> his son Bukki, his son Uzzi, his son Zerahiah, <span class="verse">6:52</span> his son Meraioth, his son Amariah, his son Ahitub, <span class="verse">6:53</span> his son Zadok, and his son Ahimaaz. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:54</span> These were the areas where Aaron’s descendants lived: </p>
<p class="bodytext">The following belonged to the Kohathite clan, for they received the first allotment: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:55</span> They were allotted Hebron in the territory of Judah, as well as its surrounding pasturelands. <span class="verse">6:56</span> (But the city’s land and nearby towns were allotted to Caleb son of Jephunneh.) <span class="verse">6:57</span> The descendants of Aaron were also allotted as cities of refuge Hebron, Libnah and its pasturelands, Jattir, Eshtemoa and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:58</span> Hilez and its pasturelands, Debir and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:59</span> Ashan and its pasturelands, and Beth Shemesh and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:60</span> Within the territory of the tribe of Benjamin they were allotted Geba and its pasturelands, Alemeth and its pasturelands, and Anathoth and its pasturelands. Their clans were allotted thirteen cities in all. <span class="verse">6:61</span> The rest of Kohath’s descendants were allotted ten cities in the territory of the half-tribe of Manasseh. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:62</span> The clans of Gershom’s descendants received thirteen cities within the territory of the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and Manasseh (in Bashan). </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:63</span> The clans of Merari’s descendants were allotted twelve cities within the territory of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:64</span> So the Israelites gave to the Levites these cities and their pasturelands. <span class="verse">6:65</span> They allotted these previously named cities from the territory of the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:66</span> The clans of Kohath’s descendants also received cities as their territory within the tribe of Ephraim. <span class="verse">6:67</span> They were allotted as cities of refuge Shechem and its pasturelands (in the hill country of Ephraim), Gezer and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:68</span> Jokmeam and its pasturelands, Beth Horon and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:69</span> Aijalon and its pasturelands, and Gath Rimmon and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:70</span> Within the territory of the half-tribe of Manasseh, the rest of Kohath’s descendants received Aner and its pasturelands and Bileam and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:71</span> The following belonged to Gershom’s descendants: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Within the territory of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan and its pasturelands and Ashtaroth and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:72</span> Within the territory of the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh and its pasturelands, Daberath and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:73</span> Ramoth and its pasturelands, and Anem and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:74</span> Within the territory of the tribe of Asher: Mashal and its pasturelands, Abdon and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:75</span> Hukok and its pasturelands, and Rehob and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:76</span> Within the territory of the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee and its pasturelands, Hammon and its pasturelands, and Kiriathaim and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:77</span> The following belonged to the rest of Merari’s descendants: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Within the territory of the tribe of Zebulun: Rimmono and its pasturelands, and Tabor and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:78</span> Within the territory of the tribe of Reuben across the Jordan River east of Jericho: Bezer in the wilderness and its pasturelands, Jahzah and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:79</span> Kedemoth and its pasturelands, and Mephaath and its pasturelands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:80</span> Within the territory of the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead and its pasturelands, Mahanaim and its pasturelands, <span class="verse">6:81</span> Heshbon and its pasturelands, and Jazer and its pasturelands. </p>

</body>
</html>