<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:1</span> The one who loves discipline loves knowledge, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who hates reproof is stupid. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:2</span> A good person obtains favor from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> condemns a person with wicked schemes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:3</span> No one can be established through wickedness,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a righteous root cannot be moved. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:4</span> A noble wife is the crown of her husband,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the wife who acts shamefully is like rottenness in his bones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:5</span> The plans of the righteous are just;</p>
<p class="poetry">the counsels of the wicked are deceitful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:6</span> The words of the wicked lie in wait to shed innocent blood, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the words of the upright will deliver them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:7</span> The wicked are overthrown and perish, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the righteous household will stand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:8</span> A person will be praised in accordance with his wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one with a bewildered mind will be despised. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:9</span> Better is a person of humble standing who works for himself, </p>
<p class="poetry">than one who pretends to be somebody important yet has no food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:10</span> A righteous person cares for the life of his animal,</p>
<p class="poetry">but even the most compassionate acts of the wicked are cruel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:11</span> The one who works his field will have plenty of food,</p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever chases daydreams lacks sense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:12</span> The wicked person has desired the stronghold of the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the root of the righteous will yield fruit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:13</span> The evil person is ensnared by the transgression of his speech, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the righteous person escapes out of trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:14</span> A person will be satisfied with good from the fruit of his words, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the work of his hands will be rendered to him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:15</span> The way of a fool is right in his own opinion, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who listens to advice is wise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:16</span> A fool’s annoyance is known at once, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the prudent conceals dishonor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:17</span> The faithful witness tells what is right, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a false witness speaks deceit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:18</span> Speaking recklessly is like the thrusts of a sword,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the words of the wise bring healing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:19</span> The one who tells the truth will endure forever,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who lies will last only for a moment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:20</span> Deceit is in the heart of those who plot evil, </p>
<p class="poetry">but those who promote peace have joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:21</span> No harm will be directed at the righteous,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the wicked are filled with calamity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:22</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors a person who lies, </p>
<p class="poetry">but those who deal truthfully are his delight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:23</span> The shrewd person conceals knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">but foolish people proclaim folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:24</span> The diligent person will rule,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the slothful will be put to forced labor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:25</span> Anxiety in a person’s heart weighs him down, </p>
<p class="poetry">but an encouraging word brings him joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:26</span> The righteous person is cautious in his friendship, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the way of the wicked leads them astray. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:27</span> The lazy person does not roast his prey,</p>
<p class="poetry">but personal possessions are precious to the diligent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:28</span> In the path of righteousness there is life,</p>
<p class="poetry">but another path leads to death. </p>

</body>
</html>