<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Makes a Promise to David</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> When David had settled into his palace, he said to Nathan the prophet, “Look, I am living in a palace made from cedar, while the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s covenant is under a tent.” <span class="verse">17:2</span> Nathan said to David, “You should do whatever you have in mind, for God is with you.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:3</span> That night God told Nathan, <span class="verse">17:4</span> “Go, tell my servant David: ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: “You must not build me a house in which to live. <span class="verse">17:5</span> For I have not lived in a house from the time I brought Israel up from Egypt to the present day. I have lived in a tent that has been in various places. <span class="verse">17:6</span> Wherever I moved throughout Israel, I did not say to any of the leaders whom I appointed to care for my people Israel, ‘Why have you not built me a house made from cedar?’”’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:7</span> “So now, say this to my servant David: ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says: “I took you from the pasture and from your work as a shepherd to make you a leader of my people Israel. <span class="verse">17:8</span> I was with you wherever you went and I defeated all your enemies before you. Now I will make you as famous as the great men of the earth. <span class="verse">17:9</span> I will establish a place for my people Israel and settle them there; they will live there and not be disturbed anymore. Violent men will not oppress them again, as they did in the beginning <span class="verse">17:10</span> and during the time when I appointed judges to lead my people Israel. I will subdue all your enemies.</p>
<p class="bodytext">“‘“I declare to you that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will build a dynastic house for you! <span class="verse">17:11</span> When the time comes for you to die, I will raise up your descendant, one of your own sons, to succeed you, and I will establish his kingdom. <span class="verse">17:12</span> He will build me a house, and I will make his dynasty permanent. <span class="verse">17:13</span> I will become his father and he will become my son. I will never withhold my loyal love from him, as I withheld it from the one who ruled before you. <span class="verse">17:14</span> I will put him in permanent charge of my house and my kingdom; his dynasty will be permanent.”’” <span class="verse">17:15</span> Nathan told David all these words that were revealed to him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Praises God</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:16</span> King David went in, sat before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and said: “Who am I, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God, and what is my family, that you should have brought me to this point? <span class="verse">17:17</span> And you did not stop there, O God! You have also spoken about the future of your servant’s family. You have revealed to me what men long to know, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God. <span class="verse">17:18</span> What more can David say to you? You have honored your servant; you have given your servant special recognition. <span class="verse">17:19</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for the sake of your servant and according to your will, you have done this great thing in order to reveal your greatness. <span class="verse">17:20</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, there is none like you; there is no God besides you! What we heard is true! <span class="verse">17:21</span> And who is like your people, Israel, a unique nation in the earth? Their God went to claim a nation for himself! You made a name for yourself by doing great and awesome deeds when you drove out nations before your people whom you had delivered from the Egyptian empire and its gods. <span class="verse">17:22</span> You made Israel your very own nation for all time. You, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, became their God. <span class="verse">17:23</span> So now, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, may the promise you made about your servant and his family become a permanent reality! Do as you promised, <span class="verse">17:24</span> so it may become a reality and you may gain lasting fame, as people say, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies is the God of Israel.’ The dynasty of your servant David will be established before you, <span class="verse">17:25</span> for you, my God, have revealed to your servant that you will build a dynasty for him. That is why your servant has had the courage to pray to you. <span class="verse">17:26</span> Now, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you are the true God; you have made this good promise to your servant. <span class="verse">17:27</span> Now you are willing to bless your servant’s dynasty so that it may stand permanently before you, for you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have blessed it and it will be blessed from now on into the future.” </p>

</body>
</html>