<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 84</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 84</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>gittith</i> style; written by the Korahites, a psalm.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:1</span> How lovely is the place where you live, </p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:2</span> I desperately want to be </p>
<p class="poetry">in the courts of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. </p>
<p class="poetry">My heart and my entire being shout for joy</p>
<p class="poetry">to the living God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:3</span> Even the birds find a home there,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the swallow builds a nest,</p>
<p class="poetry">where she can protect her young </p>
<p class="poetry">near your altars, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies,</p>
<p class="poetry">my King and my God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:4</span> How blessed are those who live in your temple</p>
<p class="poetry">and praise you continually. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:5</span> How blessed are those who find their strength in you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and long to travel the roads that lead to your temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:6</span> As they pass through the Baca Valley, </p>
<p class="poetry">he provides a spring for them. </p>
<p class="poetry">The rain even covers it with pools of water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:7</span> They are sustained as they travel along; </p>
<p class="poetry">each one appears before God in Zion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:8</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies, </p>
<p class="poetry">hear my prayer.</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen, O God of Jacob. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:9</span> O God, take notice of our shield. </p>
<p class="poetry">Show concern for your chosen king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:10</span> Certainly spending just one day in your temple courts is better</p>
<p class="poetry">than spending a thousand elsewhere. </p>
<p class="poetry">I would rather stand at the entrance to the temple of my God</p>
<p class="poetry">than live in the tents of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:11</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God is our sovereign protector. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> bestows favor and honor;</p>
<p class="poetry">he withholds no good thing from those who have integrity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">84:12</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, </p>
<p class="poetry">how blessed are those who trust in you. </p>

</body>
</html>