<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ephesians 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ephesians<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Live in Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Therefore, be imitators of God as dearly loved children <span class="verse">5:2</span> and live in love, just as Christ also loved us and gave himself for us, a sacrificial and fragrant offering to God. <span class="verse">5:3</span> But among you there must not be either sexual immorality, impurity of any kind, or greed, as these are not fitting for the saints. <span class="verse">5:4</span> Neither should there be vulgar speech, foolish talk, or coarse jesting—all of which are out of character—but rather thanksgiving. <span class="verse">5:5</span> For you can be confident of this one thing: that no person who is immoral, impure, or greedy (such a person is an idolater) has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Live in the Light</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:6</span> Let nobody deceive you with empty words, for because of these things God’s wrath comes on the sons of disobedience. <span class="verse">5:7</span> Therefore do not be sharers with them, <span class="verse">5:8</span> for you were at one time darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live like children of light— <span class="verse">5:9</span> for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness, and truth— <span class="verse">5:10</span> trying to learn what is pleasing to the Lord. <span class="verse">5:11</span> Do not participate in the unfruitful deeds of darkness, but rather expose them. <span class="verse">5:12</span> For the things they do in secret are shameful even to mention. <span class="verse">5:13</span> But all things being exposed by the light are made visible. <span class="verse">5:14</span> For everything made visible is light, and for this reason it says: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Awake, O sleeper! </p>
<p class="poetry">Rise from the dead,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Christ will shine on you!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Live Wisely</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:15</span> Therefore consider carefully how you live—not as unwise but as wise, <span class="verse">5:16</span> taking advantage of every opportunity, because the days are evil. <span class="verse">5:17</span> For this reason do not be foolish, but be wise by understanding what the Lord’s will is. <span class="verse">5:18</span> And do not get drunk with wine, which is debauchery, but be filled by the Spirit, <span class="verse">5:19</span> speaking to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making music in your hearts to the Lord, <span class="verse">5:20</span> always giving thanks to God the Father for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, <span class="verse">5:21</span> and submitting to one another out of reverence for Christ. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortations to Households</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:22</span>  Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord, <span class="verse">5:23</span> because the husband is the head of the wife as also Christ is the head of the church (he himself being the savior of the body). <span class="verse">5:24</span> But as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything. <span class="verse">5:25</span> Husbands, love your wives just as Christ loved the church and gave himself for her <span class="verse">5:26</span> to sanctify her by cleansing her with the washing of the water by the word, <span class="verse">5:27</span> so that he may present the church to himself as glorious—not having a stain or wrinkle, or any such blemish, but holy and blameless. <span class="verse">5:28</span> In the same way husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. <span class="verse">5:29</span> For no one has ever hated his own body, but he feeds it and takes care of it, just as Christ also does the church, <span class="verse">5:30</span> because we are members of his body. <span class="verse">5:31</span> <b><i>For</i></b> <b><i>this reason a man will leave his father and mother and will be joined to his wife, and the two will become</i></b> <i><b>one flesh.</b></i> <span class="verse">5:32</span> This mystery is great—but I am actually speaking with reference to Christ and the church. <span class="verse">5:33</span> Nevertheless, each one of you must also love his own wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband. </p>

</body>
</html>