<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David’s Prestige Grows</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> King Hiram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar logs, stonemasons, and carpenters to build a palace for him. <span class="verse">14:2</span> David realized that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had established him as king over Israel and that he had elevated his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:3</span> In Jerusalem David married more wives and fathered more sons and daughters. <span class="verse">14:4</span> These are the names of children born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, <span class="verse">14:5</span> Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet, <span class="verse">14:6</span> Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, <span class="verse">14:7</span> Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:8</span> When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king of all Israel, all the Philistines marched up to confront him. When David heard about it, he marched out against them. <span class="verse">14:9</span> Now the Philistines had come and raided the Valley of Rephaim. <span class="verse">14:10</span> David asked God, “Should I march up against the Philistines? Will you hand them over to me?” The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to him, “March up! I will hand them over to you!” <span class="verse">14:11</span> So they marched against Baal Perazim and David defeated them there. David said, “Using me as his instrument, God has burst out against my enemies like water bursts out.” So that place is called Baal Perazim. <span class="verse">14:12</span> The Philistines left their idols there, so David ordered that they be burned. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:13</span> The Philistines again raided the valley. <span class="verse">14:14</span> So David again asked God what he should do. This time God told him, “Don’t march up after them; circle around them and come against them in front of the trees. <span class="verse">14:15</span> When you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the trees, then attack. For at that moment God is going before you to strike down the army of the Philistines.” <span class="verse">14:16</span> David did just as God commanded him, and they struck down the Philistine army from Gibeon to Gezer. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:17</span> So David became famous in all the lands; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> caused all the nations to fear him. </p>

</body>
</html>