<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 34</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 34</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu’s Second Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:1</span> Elihu answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:2</span> “Listen to my words, you wise men;</p>
<p class="poetry">hear me, you learned men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:3</span> For the ear assesses words</p>
<p class="poetry">as the mouth tastes food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:4</span> Let us evaluate for ourselves what is right; </p>
<p class="poetry">let us come to know among ourselves what is good. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:5</span> For Job says, ‘I am innocent, </p>
<p class="poetry">but God turns away my right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:6</span> Concerning my right, should I lie? </p>
<p class="poetry">My wound is incurable,</p>
<p class="poetry">although I am without transgression.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:7</span> Who is there like Job,</p>
<p class="poetry">who drinks derision like water? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:8</span> He goes about in company with evildoers,</p>
<p class="poetry">he goes along with wicked men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:9</span> For he says, ‘It does not profit a man</p>
<p class="poetry">when he makes his delight with God.’ </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God is Not Unjust</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:10</span> “Therefore, listen to me, you men of understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry">Far be it from God to do wickedness,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the Almighty to do evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:11</span> For he repays a person for his work, </p>
<p class="poetry">and according to the conduct of a person,</p>
<p class="poetry">he causes the consequences to find him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:12</span> Indeed, in truth, God does not act wickedly,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the Almighty does not pervert justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:13</span> Who entrusted to him the earth?</p>
<p class="poetry">And who put him over the whole world? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:14</span> If God were to set his heart on it, </p>
<p class="poetry">and gather in his spirit and his breath, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:15</span> all flesh would perish together</p>
<p class="poetry">and human beings would return to dust. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Is Impartial and Omniscient</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:16</span> “If you have understanding, listen to this,</p>
<p class="poetry">hear what I have to say. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:17</span> Do you really think </p>
<p class="poetry">that one who hates justice can govern? </p>
<p class="poetry">And will you declare guilty </p>
<p class="poetry">the supremely Righteous One, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:18</span> who says to a king, ‘Worthless man,’ </p>
<p class="poetry">and to nobles, ‘Wicked men,’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:19</span> who shows no partiality to princes,</p>
<p class="poetry">and does not take note of the rich more than the poor,</p>
<p class="poetry">because all of them are the work of his hands? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:20</span> In a moment they die, in the middle of the night, </p>
<p class="poetry">people are shaken and they pass away.</p>
<p class="poetry">The mighty are removed effortlessly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:21</span> For his eyes are on the ways of an individual,</p>
<p class="poetry">he observes all a person’s steps. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:22</span> There is no darkness, and no deep darkness,</p>
<p class="poetry">where evildoers can hide themselves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:23</span> For he does not still consider a person, </p>
<p class="poetry">that he should come before God in judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:24</span> He shatters the great without inquiry, </p>
<p class="poetry">and sets up others in their place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:25</span> Therefore, he knows their deeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">he overthrows them in the night </p>
<p class="poetry">and they are crushed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:26</span> He strikes them for their wickedness, </p>
<p class="poetry">in a place where people can see, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:27</span> because they have turned away from following him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and have not understood any of his ways, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:28</span> so that they caused the cry of the poor</p>
<p class="poetry">to come before him,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that he hears the cry of the needy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:29</span> But if God is quiet, who can condemn him?</p>
<p class="poetry">If he hides his face, then who can see him?</p>
<p class="poetry">Yet he is over the individual and the nation alike, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:30</span> so that the godless man should not rule,</p>
<p class="poetry">and not lay snares for the people. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job Is Foolish to Rebel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:31</span> “Has anyone said to God,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘I have endured chastisement, </p>
<p class="poetry">but I will not act wrongly any more;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:32</span> teach me what I cannot see; </p>
<p class="poetry">if I have done evil, I will do so no more’? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:33</span> Is it your opinion that God should recompense it,</p>
<p class="poetry">because you reject this? </p>
<p class="poetry">But you must choose, and not I,</p>
<p class="poetry">so tell us what you know. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:34</span> Men of understanding say to me—</p>
<p class="poetry">any wise man listening to me says—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:35</span> that Job speaks without knowledge</p>
<p class="poetry">and his words are without understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:36</span> But Job will be tested to the end,</p>
<p class="poetry">because his answers are like those of wicked men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:37</span> For he adds transgression to his sin;</p>
<p class="poetry">in our midst he claps his hands, </p>
<p class="poetry">and multiplies his words against God.” </p>

</body>
</html>