<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Wife for Isaac</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:1</span> Now Abraham was old, well advanced in years, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had blessed him in everything. <span class="verse">24:2</span> Abraham said to his servant, the senior one in his household who was in charge of everything he had, “Put your hand under my thigh <span class="verse">24:3</span> so that I may make you solemnly promise by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of heaven and the God of the earth: You must not acquire a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am living. <span class="verse">24:4</span> You must go instead to my country and to my relatives to find a wife for my son Isaac.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:5</span> The servant asked him, “What if the woman is not willing to come back with me to this land? Must I then take your son back to the land from which you came?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:6</span> “Be careful never to take my son back there!” Abraham told him. <span class="verse">24:7</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of heaven, who took me from my father’s house and the land of my relatives, promised me with a solemn oath, ‘To your descendants I will give this land.’ He will send his angel before you so that you may find a wife for my son from there. <span class="verse">24:8</span> But if the woman is not willing to come back with you, you will be free from this oath of mine. But you must not take my son back there!” <span class="verse">24:9</span> So the servant placed his hand under the thigh of his master Abraham and gave his solemn promise he would carry out his wishes. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:10</span> Then the servant took ten of his master’s camels and departed with all kinds of gifts from his master at his disposal. He journeyed to the region of Aram Naharaim and the city of Nahor. <span class="verse">24:11</span> He made the camels kneel down by the well outside the city. It was evening, the time when the women would go out to draw water. <span class="verse">24:12</span> He prayed, “O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, God of my master Abraham, guide me today. Be faithful to my master Abraham. <span class="verse">24:13</span> Here I am, standing by the spring, and the daughters of the people who live in the town are coming out to draw water. <span class="verse">24:14</span> I will say to a young woman, ‘Please lower your jar so I may drink.’ May the one you have chosen for your servant Isaac reply, ‘Drink, and I’ll give your camels water too.’ In this way I will know that you have been faithful to my master.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:15</span> Before he had finished praying, there came Rebekah with her water jug on her shoulder. She was the daughter of Bethuel son of Milcah (Milcah was the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor). <span class="verse">24:16</span> Now the young woman was very beautiful. She was a virgin; no man had ever been physically intimate with her. She went down to the spring, filled her jug, and came back up. <span class="verse">24:17</span> Abraham’s servant ran to meet her and said, “Please give me a sip of water from your jug.” <span class="verse">24:18</span> “Drink, my lord,” she replied, and quickly lowering her jug to her hands, she gave him a drink. <span class="verse">24:19</span> When she had done so, she said, “I’ll draw water for your camels too, until they have drunk as much as they want.” <span class="verse">24:20</span> She quickly emptied her jug into the watering trough and ran back to the well to draw more water until she had drawn enough for all his camels. <span class="verse">24:21</span> Silently the man watched her with interest to determine if the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had made his journey successful or not. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:22</span> After the camels had finished drinking, the man took out a gold nose ring weighing a beka and two gold wrist bracelets weighing ten shekels and gave them to her. <span class="verse">24:23</span> “Whose daughter are you?” he asked. “Tell me, is there room in your father’s house for us to spend the night?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:24</span> She said to him, “I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom Milcah bore to Nahor. <span class="verse">24:25</span> We have plenty of straw and feed,” she added, “and room for you to spend the night.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:26</span> The man bowed his head and worshiped the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, <span class="verse">24:27</span> saying, “Praised be the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of my master Abraham, who has not abandoned his faithful love for my master! The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has led me to the house of my master’s relatives!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:28</span> The young woman ran and told her mother’s household all about these things. <span class="verse">24:29</span> (Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban.) Laban rushed out to meet the man at the spring. <span class="verse">24:30</span> When he saw the bracelets on his sister’s wrists and the nose ring and heard his sister Rebekah say, “This is what the man said to me,” he went out to meet the man. There he was, standing by the camels near the spring. <span class="verse">24:31</span> Laban said to him, “Come, you who are blessed by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! Why are you standing out here when I have prepared the house and a place for the camels?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:32</span> So Abraham’s servant went to the house and unloaded the camels. Straw and feed were given to the camels, and water was provided so that he and the men who were with him could wash their feet. <span class="verse">24:33</span> When food was served, he said, “I will not eat until I have said what I want to say.” “Tell us,” Laban said. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:34</span> “I am the servant of Abraham,” he began. <span class="verse">24:35</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has richly blessed my master and he has become very wealthy. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has given him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys. <span class="verse">24:36</span> My master’s wife Sarah bore a son to him when she was old, and my master has given him everything he owns. <span class="verse">24:37</span> My master made me swear an oath. He said, ‘You must not acquire a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am living, <span class="verse">24:38</span> but you must go to the family of my father and to my relatives to find a wife for my son.’ <span class="verse">24:39</span> But I said to my master, ‘What if the woman does not want to go with me?’ <span class="verse">24:40</span> He answered, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you. He will make your journey a success and you will find a wife for my son from among my relatives, from my father’s family. <span class="verse">24:41</span> You will be free from your oath if you go to my relatives and they will not give her to you. Then you will be free from your oath.’ <span class="verse">24:42</span> When I came to the spring today, I prayed, ‘O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, God of my master Abraham, if you have decided to make my journey successful, may events unfold as follows: <span class="verse">24:43</span> Here I am, standing by the spring. When the young woman goes out to draw water, I’ll say, “Please give me a little water to drink from your jug.” <span class="verse">24:44</span> Then she will reply to me, “Drink, and I’ll draw water for your camels too.” May that woman be the one whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has chosen for my master’s son.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:45</span> “Before I finished praying in my heart, along came Rebekah with her water jug on her shoulder! She went down to the spring and drew water. So I said to her, ‘Please give me a drink.’ <span class="verse">24:46</span> She quickly lowered her jug from her shoulder and said, ‘Drink, and I’ll give your camels water too.’ So I drank, and she also gave the camels water. <span class="verse">24:47</span> Then I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ She replied, ‘The daughter of Bethuel the son of Nahor, whom Milcah bore to Nahor.’ I put the ring in her nose and the bracelets on her wrists. <span class="verse">24:48</span> Then I bowed down and worshiped the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. I praised the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right path to find the granddaughter of my master’s brother for his son. <span class="verse">24:49</span> Now, if you will show faithful love to my master, tell me. But if not, tell me as well, so that I may go on my way.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:50</span> Then Laban and Bethuel replied, “This is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s doing. Our wishes are of no concern. <span class="verse">24:51</span> Rebekah stands here before you. Take her and go so that she may become the wife of your master’s son, just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has decided.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:52</span> When Abraham’s servant heard their words, he bowed down to the ground before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">24:53</span> Then he brought out gold, silver jewelry, and clothing and gave them to Rebekah. He also gave valuable gifts to her brother and to her mother. <span class="verse">24:54</span> After this, he and the men who were with him ate a meal and stayed there overnight. </p>
<p class="bodytext">When they got up in the morning, he said, “Let me leave now so I can return to my master.” <span class="verse">24:55</span> But Rebekah’s brother and her mother replied, “Let the girl stay with us a few more days, perhaps ten. Then she can go.” <span class="verse">24:56</span> But he said to them, “Don’t detain me—the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has granted me success on my journey. Let me leave now so I may return to my master.” <span class="verse">24:57</span> Then they said, “We’ll call the girl and find out what she wants to do.” <span class="verse">24:58</span> So they called Rebekah and asked her, “Do you want to go with this man?” She replied, “I want to go.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:59</span> So they sent their sister Rebekah on her way, accompanied by her female attendant, with Abraham’s servant and his men. <span class="verse">24:60</span> They blessed Rebekah with these words: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Our sister, may you become the mother of thousands of ten thousands! </p>
<p class="poetry">May your descendants possess the strongholds of their enemies.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:61</span> Then Rebekah and her female servants mounted the camels and rode away with the man. So Abraham’s servant took Rebekah and left. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:62</span> Now Isaac came from Beer Lahai Roi, for he was living in the Negev. <span class="verse">24:63</span> He went out to relax in the field in the early evening. Then he looked up and saw that there were camels approaching. <span class="verse">24:64</span> Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac. She got down from her camel <span class="verse">24:65</span> and asked Abraham’s servant, “Who is that man walking in the field toward us?” “That is my master,” the servant replied. So she took her veil and covered herself.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:66</span> The servant told Isaac everything that had happened. <span class="verse">24:67</span> Then Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah’s tent. He took her as his wife and loved her. So Isaac was comforted after his mother’s death. </p>

</body>
</html>