<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Luke 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Luke<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Call to Repent </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> Now there were some present on that occasion who told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices. <span class="verse">13:2</span> He answered them, “Do you think these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered these things? <span class="verse">13:3</span> No, I tell you! But unless you repent, you will all perish as well! <span class="verse">13:4</span> Or those eighteen who were killed when the tower in Siloam fell on them, do you think they were worse offenders than all the others who live in Jerusalem? <span class="verse">13:5</span> No, I tell you! But unless you repent you will all perish as well!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warning to Israel to Bear Fruit</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:6</span> Then Jesus told this parable: “A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it and found none. <span class="verse">13:7</span> So he said to the worker who tended the vineyard, ‘For three years now, I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, and each time I inspect it I find none. Cut it down! Why should it continue to deplete the soil?’ <span class="verse">13:8</span> But the worker answered him, ‘Sir, leave it alone this year too, until I dig around it and put fertilizer on it. <span class="verse">13:9</span> Then if it bears fruit next year, very well, but if not, you can cut it down.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing on the Sabbath</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:10</span> Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath, <span class="verse">13:11</span> and a woman was there who had been disabled by a spirit for eighteen years. She was bent over and could not straighten herself up completely. <span class="verse">13:12</span> When Jesus saw her, he called her to him and said, “Woman, you are freed from your infirmity.” <span class="verse">13:13</span> Then he placed his hands on her, and immediately she straightened up and praised God. <span class="verse">13:14</span> But the president of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, said to the crowd, “There are six days on which work should be done! So come and be healed on those days, and not on the Sabbath day.” <span class="verse">13:15</span> Then the Lord answered him, “You hypocrites! Does not each of you on the Sabbath untie his ox or his donkey from its stall, and lead it to water? <span class="verse">13:16</span> Then shouldn’t this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom Satan bound for eighteen long years, be released from this imprisonment on the Sabbath day?” <span class="verse">13:17</span> When he said this all his adversaries were humiliated, but the entire crowd was rejoicing at all the wonderful things he was doing. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">On the Kingdom of God </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:18</span> Thus Jesus asked, “What is the kingdom of God like? To what should I compare it? <span class="verse">13:19</span> It is like a mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his garden. It grew and became a tree, and the wild birds nested in its branches.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:20</span> Again he said, “To what should I compare the kingdom of God? <span class="verse">13:21</span> It is like yeast that a woman took and mixed with three measures of flour until all the dough had risen.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Narrow Door</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:22</span> Then Jesus traveled throughout towns and villages, teaching and making his way toward Jerusalem. <span class="verse">13:23</span> Someone asked him, “Lord, will only a few be saved?” So he said to them, <span class="verse">13:24</span> “Exert every effort to enter through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will try to enter and will not be able to. <span class="verse">13:25</span> Once the head of the house gets up and shuts the door, then you will stand outside and start to knock on the door and beg him, ‘Lord, let us in!’ But he will answer you, ‘I don’t know where you come from.’ <span class="verse">13:26</span> Then you will begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.’ <span class="verse">13:27</span> But he will reply, ‘I don’t know where you come from! Go away from me, all you evildoers!’ <span class="verse">13:28</span> There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God but you yourselves thrown out. <span class="verse">13:29</span> Then people will come from east and west, and from north and south, and take their places at the banquet table in the kingdom of God. <span class="verse">13:30</span> But indeed, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Going to Jerusalem</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:31</span> At that time, some Pharisees came up and said to Jesus, “Get away from here, because Herod wants to kill you.” <span class="verse">13:32</span> But he said to them, “Go and tell that fox, ‘Look, I am casting out demons and performing healings today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will complete my work. <span class="verse">13:33</span> Nevertheless I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the next day, because it is impossible that a prophet should be killed outside Jerusalem.’ <span class="verse">13:34</span> O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those who are sent to you! How often I have longed to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you would have none of it! <span class="verse">13:35</span> Look, your house is forsaken! And I tell you, you will not see me until you say, ‘<b><i>Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!</i></b>’” </p>

</body>
</html>