<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 46</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 46</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, by the Korahites; according to the <i>alamoth</i> style; a song.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:1</span> God is our strong refuge; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is truly our helper in times of trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:2</span> For this reason we do not fear when the earth shakes, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the mountains tumble into the depths of the sea, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:3</span> when its waves crash and foam,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the mountains shake before the surging sea. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:4</span> The river’s channels bring joy to the city of God, </p>
<p class="poetry">the special, holy dwelling place of the Most High. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:5</span> God lives within it, it cannot be moved. </p>
<p class="poetry">God rescues it at the break of dawn. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:6</span> Nations are in uproar, kingdoms are overthrown. </p>
<p class="poetry">God gives a shout, the earth dissolves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies is on our side. </p>
<p class="poetry">The God of Jacob is our stronghold. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:8</span> Come, Witness the exploits of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">who brings devastation to the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:9</span> He brings an end to wars throughout the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">He shatters the bow and breaks the spear;</p>
<p class="poetry">he burns the shields with fire. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:10</span> He says, “Stop your striving and recognize that I am God.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will be exalted over the nations! I will be exalted over the earth!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies is on our side! </p>
<p class="poetry">The God of Jacob is our stronghold! (Selah)</p>

</body>
</html>