<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Nehemiah 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Nehemiah<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> When the wall had been rebuilt and I had positioned the doors, and the gatekeepers, the singers, and the Levites had been appointed, <span class="verse">7:2</span> I then put in charge over Jerusalem my brother Hanani and Hananiah the chief of the citadel, for he was a faithful man and feared God more than many do. <span class="verse">7:3</span> I said to them, “The gates of Jerusalem must not be opened in the early morning, until those who are standing guard close the doors and lock them. Position residents of Jerusalem as guards, some at their guard stations and some near their homes.” <span class="verse">7:4</span> Now the city was spread out and large, and there were not a lot of people in it. At that time houses had not been rebuilt. <span class="verse">7:5</span> My God placed it on my heart to gather the leaders, the officials, and the ordinary people so they could be enrolled on the basis of genealogy. I found the genealogical records of those who had formerly returned. Here is what I found written in that record: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:6</span> These are the people of the province who returned from the captivity of the exiles, whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had forced into exile. They returned to Jerusalem and to Judah, each to his own city. <span class="verse">7:7</span> They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, and Baanah.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The number of Israelite men was as follows: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:8</span> the descendants of Parosh: 2,172;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:9</span> the descendants of Shephatiah: 372;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:10</span> the descendants of Arah: 652;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:11</span> the descendants of Pahath Moab (from the line of Jeshua and Joab): 2,818;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:12</span> the descendants of Elam: 1,254;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:13</span> the descendants of Zattu: 845;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:14</span> the descendants of Zaccai: 760;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:15</span> the descendants of Binnui: 648;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:16</span> the descendants of Bebai: 628;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:17</span> the descendants of Azgad: 2,322;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:18</span> the descendants of Adonikam: 667;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:19</span> the descendants of Bigvai: 2,067;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:20</span> the descendants of Adin: 655;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:21</span> the descendants of Ater (through Hezekiah): 98;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:22</span> the descendants of Hashum: 328;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:23</span> the descendants of Bezai: 324;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:24</span> the descendants of Harif: 112;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:25</span> the descendants of Gibeon: 95;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:26</span> The men of Bethlehem and Netophah: 188;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:27</span> the men of Anathoth: 128;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:28</span> the men of the family of Azmaveth: 42;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:29</span> the men of Kiriath Jearim, Kephirah, and Beeroth: 743;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:30</span> the men of Ramah and Geba: 621;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:31</span> the men of Micmash: 122;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:32</span> the men of Bethel and Ai: 123;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:33</span> the men of the other Nebo: 52;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:34</span> the descendants of the other Elam: 1,254;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:35</span> the descendants of Harim: 320;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:36</span> the descendants of Jericho: 345;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:37</span> the descendants of Lod, Hadid, and Ono: 721;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:38</span> the descendants of Senaah: 3,930;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:39</span> The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah (through the family of Jeshua): 973;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:40</span> the descendants of Immer: 1,052;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:41</span> the descendants of Pashhur: 1,247;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:42</span> the descendants of Harim: 1,017.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:43</span> The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua (through Kadmiel, through the line of Hodaviah): 74.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:44</span> The singers: the descendants of Asaph: 148.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:45</span> The gatekeepers: the descendants of Shallum, the descendants of Ater, the descendants of Talmon, the descendants of Akkub, the descendants of Hatita, and the descendants of Shobai: 138.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:46</span> The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, the descendants of Hasupha, the descendants of Tabbaoth, <span class="verse">7:47</span> the descendants of Keros, the descendants of Sia, the descendants of Padon, <span class="verse">7:48</span> the descendants of Lebanah, the descendants of Hagabah, the descendants of Shalmai, <span class="verse">7:49</span> the descendants of Hanan, the descendants of Giddel, the descendants of Gahar, <span class="verse">7:50</span> the descendants of Reaiah, the descendants of Rezin, the descendants of Nekoda, <span class="verse">7:51</span> the descendants of Gazzam, the descendants of Uzzah, the descendants of Paseah, <span class="verse">7:52</span> the descendants of Besai, the descendants of Meunim, the descendants of Nephussim, <span class="verse">7:53</span> the descendants of Bakbuk, the descendants of Hakupha, the descendants of Harhur, <span class="verse">7:54</span> the descendants of Bazluth, the descendants of Mehida, the descendants of Harsha, <span class="verse">7:55</span> the descendants of Barkos, the descendants of Sisera, the descendants of Temah, <span class="verse">7:56</span> the descendants of Neziah, the descendants of Hatipha. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:57</span> The descendants of the servants of Solomon: the descendants of Sotai, the descendants of Sophereth, the descendants of Perida, <span class="verse">7:58</span> the descendants of Jaala, the descendants of Darkon, the descendants of Giddel, <span class="verse">7:59</span> the descendants of Shephatiah, the descendants of Hattil, the descendants of Pokereth Hazzebaim, and the descendants of Amon. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:60</span> All the temple servants and the descendants of the servants of Solomon, 392.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:61</span> These are the ones who came up from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha, Kerub, Addon, and Immer (although they were unable to certify their family connection or their ancestry, as to whether they were really from Israel): </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:62</span> the descendants of Delaiah, the descendants of Tobiah, and the descendants of Nekoda, 642.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:63</span> And from among the priests: the descendants of Hobaiah, the descendants of Hakkoz, and the descendants of Barzillai (who had married a woman from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite and was called by that name). <span class="verse">7:64</span> They searched for their records in the genealogical materials, but none were found. They were therefore excluded from the priesthood. <span class="verse">7:65</span> The governor instructed them not to eat any of the sacred food until there was a priest who could consult the Urim and Thummim. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:66</span> The entire group numbered 42,360— <span class="verse">7:67</span> not counting their 7,337 male and female servants. They also had 245 male and female singers. <span class="verse">7:68</span> They had 736 horses, 245 mules, <span class="verse">7:69</span> (7:68) 435 camels, and 6,720 donkeys. <span class="verse">7:70</span> Some of the family leaders contributed to the work. The governor contributed to the treasury 1,000 gold drachmas, 50 bowls, and 530 priestly garments. <span class="verse">7:71</span> Some of the family leaders gave to the project treasury 20,000 gold drachmas and 2,200 silver minas. <span class="verse">7:72</span> What the rest of the people gave amounted to 20,000 gold drachmas, 2,000 silver minas, and 67 priestly garments. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:73</span> The priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of the people, the temple servants, and all the rest of Israel lived in their cities.</p>

</body>
</html>