<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to Eliphaz </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> Then Job answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:2</span> “Even today my complaint is still bitter; </p>
<p class="poetry">his hand is heavy despite my groaning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:3</span> O that I knew where I might find him, </p>
<p class="poetry">that I could come to his place of residence! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:4</span> I would lay out my case before him</p>
<p class="poetry">and fill my mouth with arguments. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:5</span> I would know with what words he would answer me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and understand what he would say to me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:6</span> Would he contend with me with great power?</p>
<p class="poetry">No, he would only pay attention to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:7</span> There an upright person </p>
<p class="poetry">could present his case before him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I would be delivered forever from my judge. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Inaccessibility and Power of God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:8</span> “If I go to the east, he is not there,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the west, yet I do not perceive him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:9</span> In the north when he is at work, </p>
<p class="poetry">I do not see him; </p>
<p class="poetry">when he turns to the south, </p>
<p class="poetry">I see no trace of him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:10</span> But he knows the pathway that I take; </p>
<p class="poetry">if he tested me, I would come forth like gold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:11</span> My feet have followed his steps closely;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have kept to his way and have not turned aside. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:12</span> I have not departed from the commands of his lips;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have treasured the words of his mouth more than my allotted portion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:13</span> But he is unchangeable, and who can change him?</p>
<p class="poetry">Whatever he has desired, he does. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:14</span> For he fulfills his decree against me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and many such things are his plans. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:15</span> That is why I am terrified in his presence;</p>
<p class="poetry">when I consider, I am afraid because of him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:16</span> Indeed, God has made my heart faint; </p>
<p class="poetry">the Almighty has terrified me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:17</span> Yet I have not been silent because of the darkness,</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the thick darkness </p>
<p class="poetry">that covered my face. </p>

</body>
</html>