<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 30</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 30</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Present Misery</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:1</span> “But now they mock me, those who are younger than I,</p>
<p class="poetry">whose fathers I disdained too much </p>
<p class="poetry">to put with my sheep dogs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:2</span> Moreover, the strength of their hands—</p>
<p class="poetry">what use was it to me?</p>
<p class="poetry">Those whose strength had perished, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:3</span> gaunt with want and hunger,</p>
<p class="poetry">they would roam the parched land,</p>
<p class="poetry">by night a desolate waste. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:4</span> By the brush they would gather herbs from the salt marshes, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the root of the broom tree was their food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:5</span> They were banished from the community —</p>
<p class="poetry">people shouted at them </p>
<p class="poetry">as they would shout at thieves —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:6</span> so that they had to live </p>
<p class="poetry">in the dry stream beds, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the holes of the ground, and among the rocks. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:7</span> They brayed like animals among the bushes</p>
<p class="poetry">and were huddled together under the nettles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:8</span> Sons of senseless and nameless people, </p>
<p class="poetry">they were driven out of the land with whips. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Indignities</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:9</span> “And now I have become their taunt song;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have become a byword among them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:10</span> They detest me and maintain their distance; </p>
<p class="poetry">they do not hesitate to spit in my face. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:11</span> Because God has untied my tent cord and afflicted me,</p>
<p class="poetry">people throw off all restraint in my presence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:12</span> On my right the young rabble rise up;</p>
<p class="poetry">they drive me from place to place, </p>
<p class="poetry">and build up siege ramps against me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:13</span> They destroy my path;</p>
<p class="poetry">they succeed in destroying me </p>
<p class="poetry">without anyone assisting them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:14</span> They come in as through a wide breach;</p>
<p class="poetry">amid the crash they come rolling in. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:15</span> Terrors are turned loose on me;</p>
<p class="poetry">they drive away my honor like the wind,</p>
<p class="poetry">and as a cloud my deliverance has passed away.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Despondency</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:16</span> “And now my soul pours itself out within me; </p>
<p class="poetry">days of suffering take hold of me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:17</span> Night pierces my bones; </p>
<p class="poetry">my gnawing pains never cease.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:18</span> With great power God grasps my clothing; </p>
<p class="poetry">he binds me like the collar of my tunic. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:19</span> He has flung me into the mud,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I have come to resemble dust and ashes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:20</span> I cry out to you, but you do not answer me;</p>
<p class="poetry">I stand up, and you only look at me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:21</span> You have become cruel to me; </p>
<p class="poetry">with the strength of your hand you attack me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:22</span> You pick me up on the wind and make me ride on it; </p>
<p class="poetry">you toss me about in the storm. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:23</span> I know that you are bringing me to death,</p>
<p class="poetry">to the meeting place for all the living. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Contrast With the Past</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:24</span> “Surely one does not stretch out his hand </p>
<p class="poetry">against a broken man </p>
<p class="poetry">when he cries for help in his distress. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:25</span> Have I not wept for the unfortunate? </p>
<p class="poetry">Was not my soul grieved for the poor? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:26</span> But when I hoped for good, trouble came;</p>
<p class="poetry">when I expected light, then darkness came. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:27</span> My heart is in turmoil unceasingly; </p>
<p class="poetry">the days of my affliction confront me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:28</span> I go about blackened, but not by the sun;</p>
<p class="poetry">in the assembly I stand up and cry for help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:29</span> I have become a brother to jackals</p>
<p class="poetry">and a companion of ostriches. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:30</span> My skin has turned dark on me; </p>
<p class="poetry">my body is hot with fever. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:31</span> My harp is used for mourning</p>
<p class="poetry">and my flute for the sound of weeping. </p>

</body>
</html>