<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Matthew 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Ten Virgins</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span> “At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. <span class="verse">25:2</span> Five of the virgins were foolish, and five were wise. <span class="verse">25:3</span> When the foolish ones took their lamps, they did not take extra olive oil with them. <span class="verse">25:4</span> But the wise ones took flasks of olive oil with their lamps. <span class="verse">25:5</span> When the bridegroom was delayed a long time, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. <span class="verse">25:6</span> But at midnight there was a shout, ‘Look, the bridegroom is here! Come out to meet him.’ <span class="verse">25:7</span> Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps. <span class="verse">25:8</span> The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are going out.’ <span class="verse">25:9</span> ‘No,’ they replied. ‘There won’t be enough for you and for us. Go instead to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’ <span class="verse">25:10</span> But while they had gone to buy it, the bridegroom arrived, and those who were ready went inside with him to the wedding banquet. Then the door was shut. <span class="verse">25:11</span> Later, the other virgins came too, saying, ‘Lord, lord! Let us in!’ <span class="verse">25:12</span> But he replied, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you!’ <span class="verse">25:13</span> Therefore stay alert, because you do not know the day or the hour. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Talents </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:14</span> “For it is like a man going on a journey, who summoned his slaves and entrusted his property to them. <span class="verse">25:15</span> To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, each according to his ability. Then he went on his journey. <span class="verse">25:16</span> The one who had received five talents went off right away and put his money to work and gained five more. <span class="verse">25:17</span> In the same way, the one who had two gained two more. <span class="verse">25:18</span> But the one who had received one talent went out and dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money in it. <span class="verse">25:19</span> After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled his accounts with them. <span class="verse">25:20</span> The one who had received the five talents came and brought five more, saying, ‘Sir, you entrusted me with five talents. See, I have gained five more.’ <span class="verse">25:21</span> His master answered, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You have been faithful in a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <span class="verse">25:22</span> The one with the two talents also came and said, ‘Sir, you entrusted two talents to me. See, I have gained two more.’ <span class="verse">25:23</span> His master answered, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You have been faithful with a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <span class="verse">25:24</span> Then the one who had received the one talent came and said, ‘Sir, I knew that you were a hard man, harvesting where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter seed, <span class="verse">25:25</span> so I was afraid, and I went and hid your talent in the ground. See, you have what is yours.’ <span class="verse">25:26</span> But his master answered, ‘Evil and lazy slave! So you knew that I harvest where I didn’t sow and gather where I didn’t scatter? <span class="verse">25:27</span> Then you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and on my return I would have received my money back with interest! <span class="verse">25:28</span> Therefore take the talent from him and give it to the one who has ten. <span class="verse">25:29</span> For the one who has will be given more, and he will have more than enough. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken from him. <span class="verse">25:30</span> And throw that worthless slave into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Judgment</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:31</span> “When the Son of Man comes in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. <span class="verse">25:32</span> All the nations will be assembled before him, and he will separate people one from another like a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. <span class="verse">25:33</span> He will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left. <span class="verse">25:34</span> Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. <span class="verse">25:35</span> For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in, <span class="verse">25:36</span> I was naked and you gave me clothing, I was sick and you took care of me, I was in prison and you visited me.’ <span class="verse">25:37</span> Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? <span class="verse">25:38</span> When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or naked and clothe you? <span class="verse">25:39</span> When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ <span class="verse">25:40</span> And the king will answer them, ‘I tell you the truth, just as you did it for one of the least of these brothers or sisters of mine, you did it for me.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:41</span> “Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you accursed, into the eternal fire that has been prepared for the devil and his angels! <span class="verse">25:42</span> For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink. <span class="verse">25:43</span> I was a stranger and you did not receive me as a guest, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’ <span class="verse">25:44</span> Then they too will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not give you whatever you needed?’ <span class="verse">25:45</span> Then he will answer them, ‘I tell you the truth, just as you did not do it for one of the least of these, you did not do it for me.’ <span class="verse">25:46</span> And these will depart into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.” </p>

</body>
</html>