<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 105</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 105</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:1</span> Give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Call on his name.</p>
<p class="poetry">Make known his accomplishments among the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:2</span> Sing to him.</p>
<p class="poetry">Make music to him.</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell about all his miraculous deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:3</span> Boast about his holy name.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the hearts of those who seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:4</span> Seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and the strength he gives.</p>
<p class="poetry">Seek his presence continually. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:5</span> Recall the miraculous deeds he performed,</p>
<p class="poetry">his mighty acts and the judgments he decreed, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:6</span> O children of Abraham, God’s servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">you descendants of Jacob, God’s chosen ones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:7</span> He is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God;</p>
<p class="poetry">he carries out judgment throughout the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:8</span> He always remembers his covenantal decree,</p>
<p class="poetry">the promise he made to a thousand generations—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:9</span> the promise he made to Abraham,</p>
<p class="poetry">the promise he made by oath to Isaac. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:10</span> He gave it to Jacob as a decree,</p>
<p class="poetry">to Israel as a lasting promise, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:11</span> saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaan</p>
<p class="poetry">as the portion of your inheritance.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:12</span> When they were few in number,</p>
<p class="poetry">just a very few, and resident foreigners within it,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:13</span> they wandered from nation to nation,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from one kingdom to another. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:14</span> He let no one oppress them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he disciplined kings for their sake, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:15</span> saying, “Don’t touch my chosen ones. </p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t harm my prophets.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:16</span> He called down a famine upon the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">he cut off all the food supply. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:17</span> He sent a man ahead of them —</p>
<p class="poetry">Joseph was sold as a servant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:18</span> The shackles hurt his feet; </p>
<p class="poetry">his neck was placed in an iron collar, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:19</span> until the time when his prediction came true.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s word proved him right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:20</span> The king authorized his release; </p>
<p class="poetry">the ruler of nations set him free. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:21</span> He put him in charge of his palace, </p>
<p class="poetry">and made him manager of all his property, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:22</span> giving him authority to imprison his officials </p>
<p class="poetry">and to teach his advisers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:23</span> Israel moved to Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">Jacob lived for a time in the land of Ham. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:24</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made his people very fruitful,</p>
<p class="poetry">and made them more numerous than their enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:25</span> He caused the Egyptians to hate his people,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to mistreat his servants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:26</span> He sent his servant Moses,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Aaron, whom he had chosen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:27</span> They executed his miraculous signs among them, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his amazing deeds in the land of Ham. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:28</span> He made it dark; </p>
<p class="poetry">Moses and Aaron did not disobey his orders. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:29</span> He turned the Egyptians’ water into blood,</p>
<p class="poetry">and killed their fish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:30</span> Their land was overrun by frogs,</p>
<p class="poetry">which even got into the rooms of their kings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:31</span> He ordered flies to come; </p>
<p class="poetry">gnats invaded their whole territory. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:32</span> He sent hail along with the rain; </p>
<p class="poetry">there was lightning in their land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:33</span> He destroyed their vines and fig trees,</p>
<p class="poetry">and broke the trees throughout their territory. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:34</span> He ordered locusts to come, </p>
<p class="poetry">innumerable grasshoppers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:35</span> They ate all the vegetation in their land,</p>
<p class="poetry">and devoured the crops of their fields. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:36</span> He struck down all the firstborn in their land,</p>
<p class="poetry">the firstfruits of their reproductive power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:37</span> He brought his people out enriched with silver and gold;</p>
<p class="poetry">none of his tribes stumbled. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:38</span> Egypt was happy when they left,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they were afraid of them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:39</span> He spread out a cloud for a cover, </p>
<p class="poetry">and provided a fire to light up the night. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:40</span> They asked for food, and he sent quail;</p>
<p class="poetry">he satisfied them with food from the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:41</span> He opened up a rock and water flowed out;</p>
<p class="poetry">a river ran through dry regions.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:42</span> Yes, he remembered the sacred promise </p>
<p class="poetry">he made to Abraham his servant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:43</span> When he led his people out, they rejoiced;</p>
<p class="poetry">his chosen ones shouted with joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:44</span> He handed the territory of nations over to them,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they took possession of what other peoples had produced, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">105:45</span> so that they might keep his commands</p>
<p class="poetry">and obey his laws.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>