<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job Pleads His Cause to God </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:1</span> “Indeed, my eyes have seen all this, </p>
<p class="poetry">my ears have heard and understood it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:2</span> What you know, I know also;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am not inferior to you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:3</span> But I wish to speak to the Almighty, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I desire to argue my case with God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:4</span> But you, however, are inventors of lies; </p>
<p class="poetry">all of you are worthless physicians! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:5</span> If only you would keep completely silent! </p>
<p class="poetry">For you, that would be wisdom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:6</span> “Listen now to my argument, </p>
<p class="poetry">and be attentive to my lips’ contentions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:7</span> Will you speak wickedly on God’s behalf? </p>
<p class="poetry">Will you speak deceitfully for him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:8</span> Will you show him partiality? </p>
<p class="poetry">Will you argue the case for God? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:9</span> Would it turn out well if he would examine you?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or as one deceives a man would you deceive him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:10</span> He would certainly rebuke you</p>
<p class="poetry">if you secretly showed partiality. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:11</span> Would not his splendor terrify you</p>
<p class="poetry">and the fear he inspires fall on you?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:12</span> Your maxims are proverbs of ashes; </p>
<p class="poetry">your defenses are defenses of clay. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">13:13</span> “Refrain from talking with me so that I may speak;</p>
<p class="poetry">then let come to me what may. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:14</span> Why do I put myself in peril, </p>
<p class="poetry">and take my life in my hands? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:15</span> Even if he slays me, I will hope in him; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will surely defend my ways to his face. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:16</span> Moreover, this will become my deliverance,</p>
<p class="poetry">for no godless person would come before him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:17</span> Listen carefully to my words;</p>
<p class="poetry">let your ears be attentive to my explanation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:18</span> See now, I have prepared my case; </p>
<p class="poetry">I know that I am right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:19</span> Who will contend with me?</p>
<p class="poetry">If anyone can, I will be silent and die. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:20</span> Only in two things spare me, O God, </p>
<p class="poetry">and then I will not hide from your face: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:21</span> Remove your hand far from me</p>
<p class="poetry">and stop making me afraid with your terror. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:22</span> Then call, and I will answer,</p>
<p class="poetry">or I will speak, and you respond to me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:23</span> How many are my iniquities and sins?</p>
<p class="poetry">Show me my transgression and my sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:24</span> Why do you hide your face </p>
<p class="poetry">and regard me as your enemy? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:25</span> Do you wish to torment a windblown leaf</p>
<p class="poetry">and chase after dry chaff? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:26</span> For you write down bitter things against me</p>
<p class="poetry">and cause me to inherit the sins of my youth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:27</span> And you put my feet in the stocks </p>
<p class="poetry">and you watch all my movements; </p>
<p class="poetry">you put marks on the soles of my feet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:28</span> So I waste away like something rotten, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a garment eaten by moths. </p>

</body>
</html>