<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Nehemiah 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Nehemiah<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Population of Jerusalem</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> So the leaders of the people settled in Jerusalem, while the rest of the people cast lots to bring one out of every ten to settle in Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine remained in other cities. <span class="verse">11:2</span> The people gave their blessing on all the men who volunteered to settle in Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:3</span> These are the provincial leaders who settled in Jerusalem. (While other Israelites, the priests, the Levites, the temple attendants, and the sons of the servants of Solomon settled in the cities of Judah, each on his own property in their cities, <span class="verse">11:4</span> some of the descendants of Judah and some of the descendants of Benjamin settled in Jerusalem.) </p>
<p class="bodytext">Of the descendants of Judah: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Athaiah son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, from the descendants of Perez; <span class="verse">11:5</span> and Maaseiah son of Baruch, the son of Col-Hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, from the descendants of Shelah. <span class="verse">11:6</span> The sum total of the descendants of Perez who were settling in Jerusalem was 468 exceptional men. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:7</span> These are the descendants of Benjamin: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Sallu son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah, <span class="verse">11:8</span> and his followers, Gabbai and Sallai—928 in all. <span class="verse">11:9</span> Joel son of Zicri was the officer in charge of them, and Judah son of Hassenuah was second-in-command over the city. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:10</span> From the priests: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Jedaiah son of Joiarib, Jakin, <span class="verse">11:11</span> Seraiah son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, supervisor in the temple of God, <span class="verse">11:12</span> and their colleagues who were carrying out work for the temple—822; and Adaiah son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malkijah, <span class="verse">11:13</span> and his colleagues who were heads of families —242; and Amashsai son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer, <span class="verse">11:14</span> and his colleagues who were exceptional men—128. The officer over them was Zabdiel the son of Haggedolim. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:15</span> From the Levites: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Shemaiah son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni; <span class="verse">11:16</span> Shabbethai and Jozabad, leaders of the Levites, were in charge of the external work for the temple of God; <span class="verse">11:17</span> Mattaniah son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, the praise leader who led in thanksgiving and prayer; Bakbukiah, second among his colleagues; and Abda son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun. <span class="verse">11:18</span> The sum total of the Levites in the holy city was 284.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:19</span> And the gatekeepers: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Akkub, Talmon and their colleagues who were guarding the gates—172.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:20</span> And the rest of the Israelites, with the priests and the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, each on his own property. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:21</span> The temple attendants were living on Ophel, and Ziha and Gishpa were over them. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:22</span> The overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica. He was one of Asaph’s descendants, who were the singers responsible for the service of the temple of God. <span class="verse">11:23</span> For they were under royal orders which determined their activity day by day. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:24</span> Pethahiah son of Meshezabel, one of the descendants of Zerah son of Judah, was an adviser to the king in every matter pertaining to the people. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:25</span> As for the settlements with their fields, some of the people of Judah settled in Kiriath Arba and its neighboring villages, in Dibon and its villages, in Jekabzeel and its settlements, <span class="verse">11:26</span> in Jeshua, in Moladah, in Beth Pelet, <span class="verse">11:27</span> in Hazar Shual, in Beer Sheba and its villages, <span class="verse">11:28</span> in Ziklag, in Meconah and its villages, <span class="verse">11:29</span> in En Rimmon, in Zorah, in Jarmuth, <span class="verse">11:30</span> Zanoah, Adullam and their settlements, in Lachish and its fields, and in Azekah and its villages. So they were encamped from Beer Sheba to the Valley of Hinnom. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:31</span> Some of the descendants of Benjamin settled in Geba, Micmash, Aija, Bethel and its villages, <span class="verse">11:32</span> in Anathoth, Nob, and Ananiah, <span class="verse">11:33</span> in Hazor, Ramah, and Gittaim, <span class="verse">11:34</span> in Hadid, Zeboyim, and Neballat, <span class="verse">11:35</span> in Lod, Ono, and the Valley of the Craftsmen. <span class="verse">11:36</span> Some of the Judean divisions of the Levites settled in Benjamin. </p>

</body>
</html>