<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Not Everyone Enjoys Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Here is another misfortune that I have seen on earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it weighs heavily on people: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:2</span> God gives a man riches, property, and wealth</p>
<p class="poetry">so that he lacks nothing that his heart desires, </p>
<p class="poetry">yet God does not enable him to enjoy the fruit of his labor —</p>
<p class="poetry">instead, someone else enjoys it! </p>
<p class="poetry">This is fruitless and a grave misfortune. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:3</span> Even if a man fathers a hundred children and lives many years, </p>
<p class="poetry">even if he lives a  long, long time, but cannot enjoy his prosperity—</p>
<p class="poetry">even if he were to live forever —</p>
<p class="poetry">I would say, “A stillborn child is better off than he is.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:4</span> Though the stillborn child came into the world for no reason and departed into darkness,</p>
<p class="poetry">though its name is shrouded in darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:5</span> though it never saw the light of day nor knew anything, </p>
<p class="poetry">yet it has more rest than that man—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:6</span> if he should live a thousand years twice, yet does not enjoy his prosperity.</p>
<p class="poetry">For both of them die! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:7</span> All man’s labor is for nothing more than to fill his stomach —</p>
<p class="poetry">yet his appetite is never satisfied! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:8</span> So what advantage does a wise man have over a fool? </p>
<p class="poetry">And what advantage does a pauper gain by knowing how to survive? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:9</span> It is better to be content with what the eyes can see </p>
<p class="poetry">than for one’s heart always to crave more. </p>
<p class="poetry">This continual longing is futile—like chasing the wind. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Futile Way Life Works</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:10</span> Whatever has happened was foreordained, </p>
<p class="poetry">and what happens to a person was also foreknown.</p>
<p class="poetry">It is useless for him to argue with God about his fate</p>
<p class="poetry">because God is more powerful than he is. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:11</span> The more one argues with words, the less he accomplishes. </p>
<p class="poetry">How does that benefit him? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:12</span> For no one knows what is best for a person during his life —</p>
<p class="poetry">during the few days of his fleeting life—</p>
<p class="poetry">for they pass away like a shadow.</p>
<p class="poetry">Nor can anyone tell him what the future will hold for him on earth. </p>

</body>
</html>