<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortations to Seek Wisdom and Walk with the Lord </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> My child, do not forget my teaching,</p>
<p class="poetry">but let your heart keep my commandments, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> for they will provide a long and full life, </p>
<p class="poetry">and well-being for you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> Do not let mercy and truth leave you;</p>
<p class="poetry">bind them around your neck,</p>
<p class="poetry">write them on the tablet of your heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> Then you will find favor and good understanding, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the sight of God and people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> Trust in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with all your heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not rely on your own understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> Acknowledge him in all your ways, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he will make your paths straight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Do not be wise in your own estimation; </p>
<p class="poetry">fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and turn away from evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> This will bring healing to your body, </p>
<p class="poetry">and refreshment to your inner self. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Honor the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from your wealth</p>
<p class="poetry">and from the firstfruits of all your crops; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> then your barns will be filled completely, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your vats will overflow with new wine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> My child, do not despise discipline from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not loathe his rebuke. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> disciplines those he loves,</p>
<p class="poetry">just as a father disciplines the son in whom he delights. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessings of Obtaining Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> Blessed is the one who has found wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who obtains understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> For her benefit is more profitable than silver,</p>
<p class="poetry">and her gain is better than gold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> She is more precious than rubies,</p>
<p class="poetry">and none of the things you desire can compare with her. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> Long life is in her right hand;</p>
<p class="poetry">in her left hand are riches and honor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> Her ways are very pleasant, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all her paths are peaceful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> She is like a tree of life to those who grasp onto her, </p>
<p class="poetry">and everyone who takes hold of her will be blessed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> By wisdom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> laid the foundation of the earth; </p>
<p class="poetry">he established the heavens by understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:20</span> By his knowledge the primordial sea was broken open, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that the clouds drip down dew. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:21</span> My child, do not let them escape from your sight;</p>
<p class="poetry">safeguard sound wisdom and discretion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:22</span> So they will become life for your soul, </p>
<p class="poetry">and grace around your neck. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:23</span> Then you will walk on your way with security,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you will not stumble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:24</span> When you lie down you will not be filled with fear; </p>
<p class="poetry">when you lie down your sleep will be pleasant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:25</span> Do not be afraid of sudden disaster, </p>
<p class="poetry">or when destruction overtakes the wicked; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:26</span> for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be the source of your confidence, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he will guard your foot from being caught in a trap. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom Demonstrated in Relationships with People</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:27</span> Do not withhold good from those who need it, </p>
<p class="poetry">when you have the ability to help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:28</span> Do not say to your neighbor, “Go! Return tomorrow</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will give it,” when you have it with you at the time. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:29</span> Do not plot evil against your neighbor</p>
<p class="poetry">when he dwells by you unsuspectingly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:30</span> Do not accuse anyone without legitimate cause, </p>
<p class="poetry">if he has not treated you wrongly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:31</span> Do not envy a violent man, </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not choose any of his ways; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:32</span> for one who goes astray is an abomination to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he reveals his intimate counsel to the upright. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:33</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s curse is on the household of the wicked, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he blesses the home of the righteous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:34</span> With arrogant scoffers he is scornful,</p>
<p class="poetry">yet he shows favor to the humble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:35</span> The wise inherit honor,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he holds fools up to public contempt. </p>

</body>
</html>