<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 34</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 34</h2><p class="psasuper">By David, when he pretended to be insane before Abimelech, causing the king to send him away. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:1</span> I will praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at all times;</p>
<p class="poetry">my mouth will continually praise him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:2</span> I will boast in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">let the oppressed hear and rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:3</span> Magnify the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let us praise his name together. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:4</span> I sought the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s help and he answered me;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivered me from all my fears. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:5</span> Look to him and be radiant;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not let your faces be ashamed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:6</span> This oppressed man cried out and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> heard;</p>
<p class="poetry">he saved him from all his troubles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:7</span> The angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> camps around</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s loyal followers and delivers them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:8</span> Taste and see that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is good.</p>
<p class="poetry">How blessed is the one who takes shelter in him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:9</span> Fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you chosen people of his, </p>
<p class="poetry">for those who fear him lack nothing.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:10</span> Even young lions sometimes lack food and are hungry,</p>
<p class="poetry">but those who seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lack no good thing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:11</span> Come children. Listen to me.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will teach you what it means to fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:12</span> Do you want to really live? </p>
<p class="poetry">Would you love to live a long, happy life? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:13</span> Then make sure you don’t speak evil words </p>
<p class="poetry">or use deceptive speech. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:14</span> Turn away from evil and do what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry">Strive for peace and promote it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:15</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> pays attention to the godly</p>
<p class="poetry">and hears their cry for help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:16</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> opposes evildoers</p>
<p class="poetry">and wipes out all memory of them from the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:17</span> The godly cry out and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> hears;</p>
<p class="poetry">he saves them from all their troubles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is near the brokenhearted;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivers those who are discouraged. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:19</span> The godly face many dangers, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> saves them from each one of them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:20</span> He protects all his bones; </p>
<p class="poetry">not one of them is broken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:21</span> Evil people self-destruct; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who hate the godly are punished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">34:22</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rescues his servants; </p>
<p class="poetry">all who take shelter in him escape punishment. </p>

</body>
</html>