<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Announcement of Sin and Judgment</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Hear this, you priests! </p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention, you Israelites! </p>
<p class="poetry">Listen closely, O king! </p>
<p class="poetry">For judgment is about to overtake you. </p>
<p class="poetry">For you were like a trap to Mizpah, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a net spread out to catch Tabor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> Those who revolt are knee-deep in slaughter, </p>
<p class="poetry">but I will discipline them all. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> I know Ephraim all too well; </p>
<p class="poetry">the evil of Israel is not hidden from me.</p>
<p class="poetry">For you have engaged in prostitution, O Ephraim; </p>
<p class="poetry">Israel has defiled itself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> Their wicked deeds do not allow them to return to their God;</p>
<p class="poetry">for a spirit of idolatry is in them, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they do not acknowledge the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> The arrogance of Israel testifies against it;</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel and Ephraim will be overthrown because of their iniquity.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even Judah will be brought down with them.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Futility of Sacrificial Ritual without Moral Obedience</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> Although they bring their flocks and herds </p>
<p class="poetry">to seek the favor of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">They will not find him—</p>
<p class="poetry">he has withdrawn himself from them! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> They have committed treason against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">because they bore illegitimate children.</p>
<p class="poetry">Soon the new moon festival will devour them and their fields. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Prophet’s Declaration of Judgment</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> Blow the ram’s horn in Gibeah! </p>
<p class="poetry">Sound the trumpet in Ramah!</p>
<p class="poetry">Sound the alarm in Beth Aven; </p>
<p class="poetry">tremble in fear, O Benjamin! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> Ephraim will be ruined in the day of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">What I am declaring to the tribes of Israel will certainly take place! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Oppressors of the Helpless Will Be Oppressed</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> The princes of Judah are like those who move boundary markers.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will pour out my rage on them like a torrential flood. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> Ephraim will be oppressed, crushed under judgment, </p>
<p class="poetry">because he was determined to pursue worthless idols. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Curse of the Incurable Wound</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> I will be like a moth to Ephraim, </p>
<p class="poetry">like wood rot to the house of Judah. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> When Ephraim saw his sickness </p>
<p class="poetry">and Judah saw his wound,</p>
<p class="poetry">then Ephraim turned to Assyria,</p>
<p class="poetry">and begged its great king for help.</p>
<p class="poetry">But he will not be able to heal you. </p>
<p class="poetry">He cannot cure your wound! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lion Will Carry Israel Off Into Exile</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:14</span> I will be like a lion to Ephraim,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a young lion to the house of Judah.</p>
<p class="poetry">I myself will tear them to pieces,</p>
<p class="poetry">then I will carry them off, and no one will be able to rescue them!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> Then I will return again to my lair </p>
<p class="poetry">until they have suffered their punishment. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then they will seek me; </p>
<p class="poetry">in their distress they will earnestly seek me.</p>

</body>
</html>