<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:1</span> The wicked person fled, though no one was pursuing, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the righteous person can be as confident as a lion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:2</span> When a country is rebellious it has many princes, </p>
<p class="poetry">but by someone who is discerning and knowledgeable order is maintained. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:3</span> A poor person who oppresses the weak</p>
<p class="poetry">is like a driving rain without food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:4</span> Those who forsake the law praise the wicked, </p>
<p class="poetry">but those who keep the law contend with them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:5</span> Evil people do not understand justice, </p>
<p class="poetry">but those who seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> understand it all. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:6</span> A poor person who walks in his integrity is better</p>
<p class="poetry">than one who is perverse in his ways even though he is rich. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:7</span> The one who keeps the law is a discerning child, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a companion of gluttons brings shame to his parents. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:8</span> The one who increases his wealth by increasing interest </p>
<p class="poetry">gathers it for someone who is gracious to the needy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:9</span> The one who turns away his ear from hearing the law,</p>
<p class="poetry">even his prayer is an abomination. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:10</span> The one who leads the upright astray in an evil way</p>
<p class="poetry">will himself fall into his own pit, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the blameless will inherit what is good. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:11</span> A rich person is wise in his own opinion, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a discerning poor person can evaluate him properly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:12</span> When the righteous rejoice, great is the glory, </p>
<p class="poetry">but when the wicked rise to power, people are sought out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:13</span> The one who covers his transgressions will not prosper, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever confesses them and forsakes them will find mercy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:14</span> Blessed is the one who is always cautious, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever hardens his heart will fall into evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:15</span> Like a roaring lion or a roving bear, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is a wicked ruler over a poor people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:16</span> The prince who is a great oppressor lacks wisdom, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who hates unjust gain will prolong his days. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:17</span> The one who is tormented by the murder of another will flee to the pit; </p>
<p class="poetry">let no one support him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:18</span> The one who walks blamelessly will be delivered, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever is perverse in his ways will fall at once. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:19</span> The one who works his land will be satisfied with food, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever chases daydreams will have his fill of poverty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:20</span> A faithful person will have an abundance of blessings,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who hastens to gain riches will not go unpunished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:21</span> To show partiality is terrible, </p>
<p class="poetry">for a person will transgress over the smallest piece of bread. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:22</span> The stingy person hastens after riches</p>
<p class="poetry">and does not know that poverty will overtake him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:23</span> The one who reproves another will in the end find more favor</p>
<p class="poetry">than the one who flatters with the tongue. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:24</span> The one who robs his father and mother and says, “There is no transgression,”</p>
<p class="poetry">is a companion to the one who destroys. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:25</span> The greedy person stirs up dissension, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who trusts in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will prosper. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:26</span> The one who trusts in his own heart is a fool,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who walks in wisdom will escape. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:27</span> The one who gives to the poor will not lack, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever shuts his eyes to them will receive many curses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:28</span> When the wicked gain control, people hide themselves, </p>
<p class="poetry">but when they perish, the righteous increase. </p>

</body>
</html>