<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 103</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 103</h2><p class="psasuper">By David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:1</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, O my soul.</p>
<p class="poetry">With all that is within me, praise his holy name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:2</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, O my soul.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not forget all his kind deeds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:3</span> He is the one who forgives all your sins,</p>
<p class="poetry">who heals all your diseases, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:4</span> who delivers your life from the Pit, </p>
<p class="poetry">who crowns you with his loyal love and compassion, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:5</span> who satisfies your life with good things, </p>
<p class="poetry">so your youth is renewed like an eagle’s. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does what is fair,</p>
<p class="poetry">and executes justice for all the oppressed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> revealed his faithful acts to Moses,</p>
<p class="poetry">his deeds to the Israelites. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is compassionate and merciful;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is patient and demonstrates great loyal love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:9</span> He does not always accuse,</p>
<p class="poetry">and does not stay angry. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:10</span> He does not deal with us as our sins deserve; </p>
<p class="poetry">he does not repay us as our misdeeds deserve. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:11</span> For as the skies are high above the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">so his loyal love towers over his faithful followers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:12</span> As far as the eastern horizon is from the west, </p>
<p class="poetry">so he removes the guilt of our rebellious actions from us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:13</span> As a father has compassion on his children, </p>
<p class="poetry">so the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has compassion on his faithful followers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:14</span> For he knows what we are made of; </p>
<p class="poetry">he realizes we are made of clay. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:15</span> A person’s life is like grass. </p>
<p class="poetry">Like a flower in the field it flourishes, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:16</span> but when the hot wind blows, it disappears,</p>
<p class="poetry">and one can no longer even spot the place where it once grew.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:17</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> continually shows loyal love to his faithful followers, </p>
<p class="poetry">and is faithful to their descendants, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:18</span> to those who keep his covenant,</p>
<p class="poetry">who are careful to obey his commands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:19</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has established his throne in heaven;</p>
<p class="poetry">his kingdom extends over everything. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:20</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you angels of his,</p>
<p class="poetry">you powerful warriors who carry out his decrees</p>
<p class="poetry">and obey his orders. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:21</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, all you warriors of his, </p>
<p class="poetry">you servants of his who carry out his desires. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">103:22</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, all that he has made, </p>
<p class="poetry">in all the regions of his kingdom.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, O my soul. </p>

</body>
</html>