<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Gives Solomon Wisdom</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> Solomon son of David solidified his royal authority, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God was with him and magnified him greatly.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:2</span> Solomon addressed all Israel, including those who commanded units of a thousand and a hundred, the judges, and all the leaders of all Israel who were heads of families. <span class="verse">1:3</span> Solomon and the entire assembly went to the worship center in Gibeon, for the tent where they met God was located there, which Moses the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant had made in the wilderness. <span class="verse">1:4</span> (Now David had brought up the ark of God from Kiriath Jearim to the place he had prepared for it, for he had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">1:5</span> But the bronze altar made by Bezalel son of Uri, son of Hur, was in front of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s tabernacle. Solomon and the entire assembly prayed to him there.) <span class="verse">1:6</span> Solomon went up to the bronze altar before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> which was at the meeting tent, and he offered up 1,000 burnt sacrifices. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:7</span> That night God appeared to Solomon and said to him, “Tell me what I should give you.” <span class="verse">1:8</span> Solomon replied to God, “You demonstrated great loyalty to my father David and have made me king in his place. <span class="verse">1:9</span> Now, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God, may your promise to my father David be realized, for you have made me king over a great nation as numerous as the dust of the earth. <span class="verse">1:10</span> Now give me wisdom and discernment so I can effectively lead this nation. Otherwise no one is able to make judicial decisions for this great nation of yours.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:11</span> God said to Solomon, “Because you desire this, and did not ask for riches, wealth, and honor, or for vengeance on your enemies, and because you did not ask for long life, but requested wisdom and discernment so you can make judicial decisions for my people over whom I have made you king, <span class="verse">1:12</span> you are granted wisdom and discernment. Furthermore I am giving you riches, wealth, and honor surpassing that of any king before or after you.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:13</span> Solomon left the meeting tent at the worship center in Gibeon and went to Jerusalem, where he reigned over Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Solomon’s Wealth</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:14</span> Solomon accumulated chariots and horses. He had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses . He kept them in assigned cities and in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">1:15</span> The king made silver and gold as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones; cedar was as plentiful as sycamore fig trees are in the foothills. <span class="verse">1:16</span> Solomon acquired his horses from Egypt and from Que; the king’s traders purchased them from Que. <span class="verse">1:17</span> They paid 600 silver pieces for each chariot from Egypt, and 150 silver pieces for each horse. They also sold chariots and horses to all the kings of the Hittites and to the kings of Syria. </p>

</body>
</html>