<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 79</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 79</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm of Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:1</span> O God, foreigners have invaded your chosen land; </p>
<p class="poetry">they have polluted your holy temple</p>
<p class="poetry">and turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:2</span> They have given the corpses of your servants</p>
<p class="poetry">to the birds of the sky, </p>
<p class="poetry">the flesh of your loyal followers</p>
<p class="poetry">to the beasts of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:3</span> They have made their blood flow like water</p>
<p class="poetry">all around Jerusalem, and there is no one to bury them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:4</span> We have become an object of disdain to our neighbors;</p>
<p class="poetry">those who live on our borders taunt and insult us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:5</span> How long will this go on, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>? </p>
<p class="poetry">Will you stay angry forever?</p>
<p class="poetry">How long will your rage burn like fire? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:6</span> Pour out your anger on the nations that do not acknowledge you, </p>
<p class="poetry">on the kingdoms that do not pray to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:7</span> For they have devoured Jacob</p>
<p class="poetry">and destroyed his home. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:8</span> Do not hold us accountable for the sins of earlier generations. </p>
<p class="poetry">Quickly send your compassion our way, </p>
<p class="poetry">for we are in serious trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:9</span> Help us, O God, our deliverer!</p>
<p class="poetry">For the sake of your glorious reputation, rescue us.</p>
<p class="poetry">Forgive our sins for the sake of your reputation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:10</span> Why should the nations say, “Where is their God?”</p>
<p class="poetry">Before our very eyes may the shed blood of your servants</p>
<p class="poetry">be avenged among the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:11</span> Listen to the painful cries of the prisoners. </p>
<p class="poetry">Use your great strength to set free those condemned to die. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:12</span> Pay back our neighbors in full. </p>
<p class="poetry">May they be insulted the same way they insulted you, O Lord. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">79:13</span> Then we, your people, the sheep of your pasture,</p>
<p class="poetry">will continually thank you. </p>
<p class="poetry">We will tell coming generations of your praiseworthy acts. </p>

</body>
</html>