<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 30</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 30</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm, a song used at the dedication of the temple; by David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:1</span> I will praise you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for you lifted me up, </p>
<p class="poetry">and did not allow my enemies to gloat over me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:2</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God,</p>
<p class="poetry">I cried out to you and you healed me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:3</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you pulled me up from Sheol;</p>
<p class="poetry">you rescued me from among those descending into the grave. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:4</span> Sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you faithful followers of his;</p>
<p class="poetry">give thanks to his holy name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:5</span> For his anger lasts only a brief moment,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his good favor restores one’s life. </p>
<p class="poetry">One may experience sorrow during the night,</p>
<p class="poetry">but joy arrives in the morning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:6</span> In my self-confidence I said,</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will never be shaken.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:7</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, in your good favor you made me secure. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then you rejected me and I was terrified. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:8</span> To you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I cried out;</p>
<p class="poetry">I begged the Lord for mercy: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:9</span> “What profit is there in taking my life, </p>
<p class="poetry">in my descending into the Pit? </p>
<p class="poetry">Can the dust of the grave praise you?</p>
<p class="poetry">Can it declare your loyalty? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:10</span> Hear, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and have mercy on me.</p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, deliver me.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:11</span> Then you turned my lament into dancing;</p>
<p class="poetry">you removed my sackcloth and covered me with joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:12</span> So now my heart will sing to you and not be silent;</p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God, I will always give thanks to you.</p>

</body>
</html>