<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 60</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 60</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>shushan-eduth</i> style; a prayer of David written to instruct others. It was written when he fought against Aram Naharaim and Aram Zobah. That was when Joab turned back and struck down 12,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:1</span> O God, you have rejected us. </p>
<p class="poetry">You suddenly turned on us in your anger. </p>
<p class="poetry">Please restore us! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:2</span> You made the earth quake; you split it open. </p>
<p class="poetry">Repair its breaches, for it is ready to fall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:3</span> You have made your people experience hard times; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have made us drink intoxicating wine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:4</span> You have given your loyal followers a rallying flag,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that they might seek safety from the bow. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:5</span> Deliver by your power and answer me, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that the ones you love may be safe. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:6</span> God has spoken in his sanctuary: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will triumph. I will parcel out Shechem;</p>
<p class="poetry">the Valley of Sukkoth I will measure off. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:7</span> Gilead belongs to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">as does Manasseh. </p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim is my helmet, </p>
<p class="poetry">Judah my royal scepter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:8</span> Moab is my washbasin. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make Edom serve me. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will shout in triumph over Philistia.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:9</span> Who will lead me into the fortified city?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who will bring me to Edom? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:10</span> Have you not rejected us, O God?</p>
<p class="poetry">O God, you do not go into battle with our armies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:11</span> Give us help against the enemy,</p>
<p class="poetry">for any help men might offer is futile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:12</span> By God’s power we will conquer; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will trample down our enemies. </p>

</body>
</html>