<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Title</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> The words of the Teacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem: </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction: Utter Futility</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> “Futile! Futile!” laments the Teacher. </p>
<p class="poetry">“Absolutely futile! Everything is futile!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Futility Illustrated from Nature</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> What benefit do people get from all the effort</p>
<p class="poetry">which they expend on earth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> A generation comes and a generation goes, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the earth remains the same through the ages. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> The sun rises and the sun sets; </p>
<p class="poetry">it hurries away to a place from which it rises again. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> The wind goes to the south and circles around to the north;</p>
<p class="poetry">round and round the wind goes and on its rounds it returns. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> All the streams flow into the sea, but the sea is not full,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the place where the streams flow, there they will flow again. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> All this monotony is tiresome; no one can bear to describe it. </p>
<p class="poetry">The eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor is the ear ever content with hearing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> What exists now is what will be, </p>
<p class="poetry">and what has been done is what will be done;</p>
<p class="poetry">there is nothing truly new on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> Is there anything about which someone can say, “Look at this! It is new”? </p>
<p class="poetry">It was already done long ago, before our time. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> No one remembers the former events, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor will anyone remember the events that are yet to happen; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will not be remembered by the future generations. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Futility of Secular Accomplishment</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> I, the Teacher, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> I decided to carefully and thoroughly examine </p>
<p class="poetry">all that has been accomplished on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">I concluded: God has given people a burdensome task </p>
<p class="poetry">that keeps them occupied. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> I reflected on everything that is accomplished by man on earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I concluded: Everything he has accomplished is futile —like chasing the wind! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> What is bent cannot be straightened, </p>
<p class="poetry">and what is missing cannot be supplied. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Futility of Secular Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> I thought to myself, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I have become much wiser than any of my predecessors who ruled over Jerusalem; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have acquired much wisdom and knowledge.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> So I decided to discern the benefit of wisdom and knowledge over foolish behavior and ideas; </p>
<p class="poetry">however, I concluded that even this endeavor is like trying to chase the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:18</span> For with great wisdom comes great frustration;</p>
<p class="poetry">whoever increases his knowledge merely increases his heartache.</p>

</body>
</html>