<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Dispersion of the Nations at Babel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> The whole earth had a common language and a common vocabulary. <span class="verse">11:2</span> When the people moved eastward, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there. <span class="verse">11:3</span> Then they said to one another, “Come, let’s make bricks and bake them thoroughly.” (They had brick instead of stone and tar instead of mortar.) <span class="verse">11:4</span> Then they said, “Come, let’s build ourselves a city and a tower with its top in the heavens so that we may make a name for ourselves. Otherwise we will be scattered across the face of the entire earth.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:5</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> came down to see the city and the tower that the people had started building. <span class="verse">11:6</span> And the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “If as one people all sharing a common language they have begun to do this, then nothing they plan to do will be beyond them. <span class="verse">11:7</span> Come, let’s go down and confuse their language so they won’t be able to understand each other.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:8</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> scattered them from there across the face of the entire earth, and they stopped building the city. <span class="verse">11:9</span> That is why its name was called Babel —because there the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> confused the language of the entire world, and from there the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> scattered them across the face of the entire earth. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Genealogy of Shem</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:10</span> This is the account of Shem.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Shem was 100 years old when he became the father of Arphaxad, two years after the flood. <span class="verse">11:11</span> And after becoming the father of Arphaxad, Shem lived 500 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:12</span> When Arphaxad had lived 35 years, he became the father of Shelah. <span class="verse">11:13</span> And after he became the father of Shelah, Arphaxad lived 403 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:14</span> When Shelah had lived 30 years, he became the father of Eber. <span class="verse">11:15</span> And after he became the father of Eber, Shelah lived 403 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:16</span> When Eber had lived 34 years, he became the father of Peleg. <span class="verse">11:17</span> And after he became the father of Peleg, Eber lived 430 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:18</span> When Peleg had lived 30 years, he became the father of Reu. <span class="verse">11:19</span> And after he became the father of Reu, Peleg lived 209 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:20</span> When Reu had lived 32 years, he became the father of Serug. <span class="verse">11:21</span> And after he became the father of Serug, Reu lived 207 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:22</span> When Serug had lived 30 years, he became the father of Nahor. <span class="verse">11:23</span> And after he became the father of Nahor, Serug lived 200 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:24</span> When Nahor had lived 29 years, he became the father of Terah. <span class="verse">11:25</span> And after he became the father of Terah, Nahor lived 119 years and had other sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:26</span> When Terah had lived 70 years, he became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Record of Terah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:27</span> This is the account of Terah.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran. And Haran became the father of Lot. <span class="verse">11:28</span> Haran died in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldeans, while his father Terah was still alive. <span class="verse">11:29</span> And Abram and Nahor took wives for themselves. The name of Abram’s wife was Sarai. And the name of Nahor’s wife was Milcah; she was the daughter of Haran, who was the father of both Milcah and Iscah. <span class="verse">11:30</span> But Sarai was barren; she had no children. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:31</span> Terah took his son Abram, his grandson Lot (the son of Haran), and his daughter-in-law Sarai, his son Abram’s wife, and with them he set out from Ur of the Chaldeans to go to Canaan. When they came to Haran, they settled there. <span class="verse">11:32</span> The lifetime of Terah was 205 years, and he died in Haran. </p>

</body>
</html>