<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Eliphaz’s Third Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:2</span> “Is it to God that a strong man is of benefit?</p>
<p class="poetry">Is it to him that even a wise man is profitable? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:3</span> Is it of any special benefit to the Almighty</p>
<p class="poetry">that you should be righteous,</p>
<p class="poetry">or is it any gain to him</p>
<p class="poetry">that you make your ways blameless? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:4</span> Is it because of your piety that he rebukes you</p>
<p class="poetry">and goes to judgment with you? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:5</span> Is not your wickedness great </p>
<p class="poetry">and is there no end to your iniquity? </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">22:6</span> “For you took pledges from your brothers </p>
<p class="poetry">for no reason,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you stripped the clothing from the naked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:7</span> You gave the weary no water to drink</p>
<p class="poetry">and from the hungry you withheld food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:8</span> Although you were a powerful man, owning land, </p>
<p class="poetry">an honored man living on it, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:9</span> you sent widows away empty-handed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the arms of the orphans you crushed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:10</span> That is why snares surround you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and why sudden fear terrifies you,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:11</span> why it is so dark you cannot see, </p>
<p class="poetry">and why a flood of water covers you.</p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">22:12</span> “Is not God on high in heaven? </p>
<p class="poetry">And see the lofty stars, how high they are!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:13</span> But you have said, ‘What does God know?</p>
<p class="poetry">Does he judge through such deep darkness? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:14</span> Thick clouds are a veil for him, so he does not see us, </p>
<p class="poetry">as he goes back and forth</p>
<p class="poetry">in the vault of heaven.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:15</span> Will you keep to the old path </p>
<p class="poetry">that evil men have walked—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:16</span> men who were carried off before their time, </p>
<p class="poetry">when the flood was poured out </p>
<p class="poetry">on their foundations? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:17</span> They were saying to God, ‘Turn away from us,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and, ‘What can the Almighty do to us?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:18</span> But it was he who filled their houses </p>
<p class="poetry">with good things—</p>
<p class="poetry">yet the counsel of the wicked </p>
<p class="poetry">was far from me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:19</span> The righteous see their destruction and rejoice;</p>
<p class="poetry">the innocent mock them scornfully, saying,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:20</span> ‘Surely our enemies are destroyed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and fire consumes their wealth.’</p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">22:21</span> “Reconcile yourself with God, </p>
<p class="poetry">and be at peace with him;</p>
<p class="poetry">in this way your prosperity will be good. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:22</span> Accept instruction from his mouth</p>
<p class="poetry">and store up his words in your heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:23</span> If you return to the Almighty, you will be built up; </p>
<p class="poetry">if you remove wicked behavior far from your tent, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:24</span> and throw your gold in the dust—</p>
<p class="poetry">your gold of Ophir </p>
<p class="poetry">among the rocks in the ravines—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:25</span> then the Almighty himself will be your gold, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the choicest silver for you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:26</span> Surely then you will delight yourself in the Almighty,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will lift up your face toward God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:27</span> You will pray to him and he will hear you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you will fulfill your vows to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:28</span> Whatever you decide on a matter,</p>
<p class="poetry">it will be established for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and light will shine on your ways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:29</span> When people are brought low and you say,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Lift them up!’ </p>
<p class="poetry">then he will save the downcast; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:30</span> he will deliver even someone who is not innocent, </p>
<p class="poetry">who will escape through the cleanness of your hands.” </p>

</body>
</html>