<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Recalls Israel’s Earlier Faithfulness</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to me, <span class="verse">2:2</span> “Go and declare in the hearing of the people of Jerusalem: ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: “I have fond memories of you, how devoted you were to me in your early years. I remember how you loved me like a new bride; you followed me through the wilderness, through a land that had never been planted. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Israel was set apart to the <span class="smcaps">Lord; </span>they were like the firstfruits of a harvest to him. All who tried to devour them were punished; disaster came upon them,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Reminds Them of the Unfaithfulness of Their Ancestors</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> Now listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message, you descendants of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">all you family groups from the nation of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“What fault could your ancestors have possibly found in me</p>
<p class="poetry">that they strayed so far from me? </p>
<p class="poetry">They paid allegiance to worthless idols, and so became worthless to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> They did not ask,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Where is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who delivered us out of Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">who brought us through the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">through a land of valleys and gorges, </p>
<p class="poetry">through a land of desert and deep darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">through a land in which no one travels,</p>
<p class="poetry">and where no one lives?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> I brought you into a fertile land</p>
<p class="poetry">so you could enjoy its fruits and its rich bounty.</p>
<p class="poetry">But when you entered my land, you defiled it; </p>
<p class="poetry">you made the land I call my own loathsome to me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Your priests did not ask, ‘Where is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?’ </p>
<p class="poetry">Those responsible for teaching my law did not really know me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your rulers rebelled against me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your prophets prophesied in the name of the god Baal. </p>
<p class="poetry">They all worshiped idols that could not help them. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Charges Contemporary Israel with Spiritual Adultery</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> “So, once more I will state my case against you,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will also state it against your children and grandchildren. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> Go west across the sea to the coasts of Cyprus and see.</p>
<p class="poetry">Send someone east to Kedar and have them look carefully.</p>
<p class="poetry">See if such a thing as this has ever happened:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Has a nation ever changed its gods</p>
<p class="poetry">(even though they are not really gods at all)?</p>
<p class="poetry">But my people have exchanged me, their glorious God, </p>
<p class="poetry">for a god that cannot help them at all! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> Be amazed at this, O heavens. </p>
<p class="poetry">Be shocked and utterly dumbfounded,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> “Do so because my people have committed a double wrong:</p>
<p class="poetry">They have rejected me,</p>
<p class="poetry">the fountain of life-giving water, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they have dug cisterns for themselves,</p>
<p class="poetry">cracked cisterns that cannot even hold water. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s Reliance on Foreign Alliances (not on God)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> “Israel is not a slave, is he?</p>
<p class="poetry">He was not born into slavery, was he? </p>
<p class="poetry">If not, why then is he being carried off? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> Like lions his enemies roar victoriously over him;</p>
<p class="poetry">they raise their voices in triumph. </p>
<p class="poetry">They have laid his land waste;</p>
<p class="poetry">his cities have been burned down and deserted. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> Even the soldiers from Memphis and Tahpanhes</p>
<p class="poetry">have cracked your skulls, people of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:17</span> You have brought all this on yourself, Israel, </p>
<p class="poetry">by deserting the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God when he was leading you along the right path. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:18</span> What good will it do you then to go down to Egypt</p>
<p class="poetry">to seek help from the Egyptians? </p>
<p class="poetry">What good will it do you to go over to Assyria</p>
<p class="poetry">to seek help from the Assyrians? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:19</span> Your own wickedness will bring about your punishment.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your unfaithful acts will bring down discipline on you. </p>
<p class="poetry">Know, then, and realize how utterly harmful </p>
<p class="poetry">it was for you to reject me, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, </p>
<p class="poetry">to show no respect for me,” </p>
<p class="poetry">says the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Expresses His Exasperation at Judah’s Persistent Idolatry</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:20</span> “Indeed, long ago you threw off my authority</p>
<p class="poetry">and refused to be subject to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">You said, ‘I will not serve you.’ </p>
<p class="poetry">Instead, you gave yourself to other gods on every high hill</p>
<p class="poetry">and under every green tree,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a prostitute sprawls out before her lovers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:21</span> I planted you in the land </p>
<p class="poetry">like a special vine of the very best stock.</p>
<p class="poetry">Why in the world have you turned into something like a wild vine</p>
<p class="poetry">that produces rotten, foul-smelling grapes? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:22</span> You can try to wash away your guilt with a strong detergent.</p>
<p class="poetry">You can use as much soap as you want.</p>
<p class="poetry">But the stain of your guilt is still there for me to see,” </p>
<p class="poetry">says the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:23</span> “How can you say, ‘I have not made myself unclean.</p>
<p class="poetry">I have not paid allegiance to the gods called Baal.’</p>
<p class="poetry">Just look at the way you have behaved in the Valley of Hinnom! </p>
<p class="poetry">Think about the things you have done there!</p>
<p class="poetry">You are like a flighty, young female camel</p>
<p class="poetry">that rushes here and there, crisscrossing its path. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:24</span> You are like a wild female donkey brought up in the wilderness.</p>
<p class="poetry">In her lust she sniffs the wind to get the scent of a male. </p>
<p class="poetry">No one can hold her back when she is in heat.</p>
<p class="poetry">None of the males need wear themselves out chasing after her.</p>
<p class="poetry">At mating time she is easy to find. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:25</span> Do not chase after other gods until your shoes wear out</p>
<p class="poetry">and your throats become dry. </p>
<p class="poetry">But you say, ‘It is useless for you to try and stop me</p>
<p class="poetry">because I love those foreign gods and want to pursue them!’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:26</span> Just as a thief has to suffer dishonor when he is caught,</p>
<p class="poetry">so the people of Israel will suffer dishonor for what they have done. </p>
<p class="poetry">So will their kings and officials,</p>
<p class="poetry">their priests and their prophets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:27</span> They say to a wooden idol, ‘You are my father.’</p>
<p class="poetry">They say to a stone image, ‘You gave birth to me.’ </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, they have turned away from me instead of turning to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yet when they are in trouble, they say, ‘Come and save us!’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:28</span> But where are the gods you made for yourselves?</p>
<p class="poetry">Let them save you when you are in trouble.</p>
<p class="poetry">The sad fact is that you have as many gods</p>
<p class="poetry">as you have towns, Judah. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:29</span> Why do you try to refute me? </p>
<p class="poetry">All of you have rebelled against me,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:30</span> “It did no good for me to punish your people.</p>
<p class="poetry">They did not respond to such correction.</p>
<p class="poetry">You slaughtered your prophets</p>
<p class="poetry">like a voracious lion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:31</span> You people of this generation, </p>
<p class="poetry">listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Have I been like a wilderness to you, Israel?</p>
<p class="poetry">Have I been like a dark and dangerous land to you? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why then do you say, ‘We are free to wander. </p>
<p class="poetry">We will not come to you anymore?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:32</span> Does a young woman forget to put on her jewels?</p>
<p class="poetry">Does a bride forget to put on her bridal attire?</p>
<p class="poetry">But my people have forgotten me </p>
<p class="poetry">for more days than can even be counted. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">2:33</span> “My, how good you have become</p>
<p class="poetry">at chasing after your lovers! </p>
<p class="poetry">Why, you could even teach prostitutes a thing or two! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:34</span> Even your clothes are stained with</p>
<p class="poetry">the lifeblood of the poor who had not done anything wrong; </p>
<p class="poetry">you did not catch them breaking into your homes. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yet, in spite of all these things you have done, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:35</span> you say, ‘I have not done anything wrong,</p>
<p class="poetry">so the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> cannot really be angry with me any more.’</p>
<p class="poetry">But, watch out! I will bring down judgment on you</p>
<p class="poetry">because you say, ‘I have not committed any sin.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:36</span> Why do you constantly go about </p>
<p class="poetry">changing your political allegiances? </p>
<p class="poetry">You will get no help from Egypt</p>
<p class="poetry">just as you got no help from Assyria. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:37</span> Moreover, you will come away from Egypt</p>
<p class="poetry">with your hands covering your faces in sorrow and shame </p>
<p class="poetry">because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will not allow your reliance on them to be successful</p>
<p class="poetry">and you will not gain any help from them. </p>

</body>
</html>