<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Vision Four: The Priest</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Next I saw Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, with Satan standing at his right hand to accuse him. <span class="verse">3:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Satan, “May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rebuke you, Satan! May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Isn’t this man like a burning stick snatched from the fire?” <span class="verse">3:3</span> Now Joshua was dressed in filthy clothes as he stood there before the angel. <span class="verse">3:4</span> The angel spoke up to those standing all around, “Remove his filthy clothes.” Then he said to Joshua, “I have freely forgiven your iniquity and will dress you in fine clothing.” <span class="verse">3:5</span> Then I spoke up, “Let a clean turban be put on his head.” So they put a clean turban on his head and clothed him, while the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> stood nearby. <span class="verse">3:6</span> Then the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> exhorted Joshua solemnly: <span class="verse">3:7</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says, ‘If you follow my ways and keep my requirements, you will be able to preside over my temple and attend to my courtyards, and I will allow you to come and go among these others who are standing by you. <span class="verse">3:8</span> Listen now, Joshua the high priest, both you and your colleagues who are sitting before you, all of you are a symbol that I am about to introduce my servant, the Branch. <span class="verse">3:9</span> As for the stone I have set before Joshua—on the one stone there are seven eyes. I am about to engrave an inscription on it,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, ‘to the effect that I will remove the iniquity of this land in a single day. <span class="verse">3:10</span> In that day,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, ‘everyone will invite his friend to fellowship under his vine and under his fig tree.’” </p>

</body>
</html>