<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Burning a Useless Vine</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">15:2</span> “Son of man, of all the woody branches among the trees of the forest, what happens to the wood of the vine? <span class="verse">15:3</span> Can wood be taken from it to make anything useful? Or can anyone make a peg from it to hang things on? <span class="verse">15:4</span> No! It is thrown in the fire for fuel; when the fire has burned up both ends of it and it is charred in the middle, will it be useful for anything? <span class="verse">15:5</span> Indeed! If it was not made into anything useful when it was whole, how much less can it be made into anything when the fire has burned it up and it is charred? </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:6</span> “Therefore, this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Like the wood of the vine is among the trees of the forest that I have provided as fuel for the fire—so I will provide the residents of Jerusalem as fuel. <span class="verse">15:7</span> I will set my face against them—although they have escaped from the fire, the fire will still consume them! Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, when I set my face against them. <span class="verse">15:8</span> I will make the land desolate because they have acted unfaithfully, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>

</body>
</html>