<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 45</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 45</h1>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">45:1</span> “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says to his chosen one, </p>
<p class="poetry">to Cyrus, whose right hand I hold </p>
<p class="poetry">in order to subdue nations before him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and disarm kings, </p>
<p class="poetry">to open doors before him,</p>
<p class="poetry">so gates remain unclosed:</p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:2</span> ‘I will go before you</p>
<p class="poetry">and level mountains. </p>
<p class="poetry">Bronze doors I will shatter</p>
<p class="poetry">and iron bars I will hack through.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:3</span> I will give you hidden treasures, </p>
<p class="poetry">riches stashed away in secret places,</p>
<p class="poetry">so you may recognize that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who calls you by name, the God of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:4</span> For the sake of my servant Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel, my chosen one,</p>
<p class="poetry">I call you by name</p>
<p class="poetry">and give you a title of respect, even though you do not submit to me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:5</span> I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I have no peer, </p>
<p class="poetry">there is no God but me.</p>
<p class="poetry">I arm you for battle, even though you do not recognize me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:6</span> I do this so people will recognize from east to west</p>
<p class="poetry">that there is no God but me;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I have no peer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:7</span> I am the one who forms light</p>
<p class="poetry">and creates darkness; </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who brings about peace</p>
<p class="poetry">and creates calamity. </p>
<p class="poetry">I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who accomplishes all these things.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:8</span> O sky, rain down from above!</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the clouds send down showers of deliverance!</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the earth absorb it so salvation may grow, </p>
<p class="poetry">and deliverance may sprout up along with it.</p>
<p class="poetry">I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, create it.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Gives a Warning</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:9</span> One who argues with his Creator is in grave danger, </p>
<p class="poetry">one who is like a mere shard among the other shards on the ground!</p>
<p class="poetry">The clay should not say to the potter, </p>
<p class="poetry">“What in the world are you doing?</p>
<p class="poetry">Your work lacks skill!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:10</span> Danger awaits one who says to his father,</p>
<p class="poetry">“What in the world are you fathering?”</p>
<p class="poetry">and to his mother,</p>
<p class="poetry">“What in the world are you bringing forth?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:11</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Holy One of Israel, the one who formed him,</p>
<p class="poetry">concerning things to come: </p>
<p class="poetry">“How dare you question me about my children!</p>
<p class="poetry">How dare you tell me what to do with the work of my own hands! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:12</span> I made the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">I created the people who live on it.</p>
<p class="poetry">It was me—my hands stretched out the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry">I give orders to all the heavenly lights. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:13</span> It is me—I stir him up and commission him; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make all his ways level.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will rebuild my city;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will send my exiled people home,</p>
<p class="poetry">but not for a price or a bribe,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord is the Nations’ Only Hope</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">45:14</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“The profit of Egypt and the revenue of Ethiopia, </p>
<p class="poetry">along with the Sabeans, those tall men,</p>
<p class="poetry">will be brought to you and become yours.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will walk behind you, coming along in chains. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will bow down to you</p>
<p class="poetry">and pray to you: </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Truly God is with you; he has no peer; </p>
<p class="poetry">there is no other God!’” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:15</span> Yes, you are a God who keeps hidden,</p>
<p class="poetry">O God of Israel, deliverer! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:16</span> They will all be ashamed and embarrassed;</p>
<p class="poetry">those who fashion idols will all be humiliated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:17</span> Israel will be delivered once and for all by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will never again be ashamed or humiliated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:18</span> For this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who created the sky—</p>
<p class="poetry">he is the true God, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who formed the earth and made it;</p>
<p class="poetry">he established it,</p>
<p class="poetry">he did not create it without order, </p>
<p class="poetry">he formed it to be inhabited:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I have no peer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:19</span> I have not spoken in  secret,</p>
<p class="poetry">in some hidden place. </p>
<p class="poetry">I did not tell Jacob’s descendants,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Seek me in vain!’ </p>
<p class="poetry">I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who speaks honestly,</p>
<p class="poetry">who makes reliable announcements. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:20</span> Gather together and come!</p>
<p class="poetry">Approach together, you refugees from the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who carry wooden idols know nothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who pray to a god that cannot deliver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:21</span> Tell me! Present the evidence! </p>
<p class="poetry">Let them consult with one another.</p>
<p class="poetry">Who predicted this in the past?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who announced it beforehand?</p>
<p class="poetry">Was it not I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?</p>
<p class="poetry">I have no peer, there is no God but me,</p>
<p class="poetry">a God who vindicates and delivers; </p>
<p class="poetry">there is none but me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:22</span> Turn to me so you can be delivered, </p>
<p class="poetry">all you who live in the earth’s remote regions!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I am God, and I have no peer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:23</span> I solemnly make this oath —</p>
<p class="poetry">what I say is true and reliable: </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Surely every knee will bow to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">every tongue will solemnly affirm; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:24</span> they will say about me,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Yes, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is a powerful deliverer.”’” </p>
<p class="poetry">All who are angry at him will cower before him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:25</span> All the descendants of Israel will be vindicated by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">and will boast in him. </p>

</body>
</html>