<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zephaniah 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zephaniah<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> This is the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message that came to Zephaniah son of Cushi, son of Gedaliah, son of Amariah, son of Hezekiah during the time of Josiah son of Amon, king of Judah: </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Day of Judgment is Approaching</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> “I will destroy everything from the face of the earth,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> “I will destroy people and animals;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will destroy the birds in the sky</p>
<p class="poetry">and the fish in the sea.</p>
<p class="poetry">(The idolatrous images of these creatures will be destroyed along with evil people.) </p>
<p class="poetry">I will remove humanity from the face of the earth,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> “I will attack Judah</p>
<p class="poetry">and all who live in Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will remove from this place every trace of Baal worship, </p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the very memory of the pagan priests. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> I will remove those who worship the stars in the sky from their rooftops, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who swear allegiance to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> while taking oaths in the name of their ‘king,’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> and those who turn their backs on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">and do not want the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s help or guidance.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> Be silent before the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s day of judgment is almost here. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has prepared a sacrificial meal; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has ritually purified his guests. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> “On the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sacrificial meal,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will punish the princes and the king’s sons,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all who wear foreign styles of clothing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> On that day I will punish all who leap over the threshold, </p>
<p class="poetry">who fill the house of their master with wealth taken by violence and deceit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> On that day,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">“a loud cry will go up from the Fish Gate, </p>
<p class="poetry">wailing from the city’s newer district, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a loud crash from the hills. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> Wail, you who live in the market district, </p>
<p class="poetry">for all the merchants will disappear </p>
<p class="poetry">and those who count money will be removed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> At that time I will search through Jerusalem with lamps.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will punish the people who are entrenched in their sin, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who think to themselves, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> neither rewards nor punishes.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> Their wealth will be stolen</p>
<p class="poetry">and their houses ruined!</p>
<p class="poetry">They will not live in the houses they have built,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor will they drink the wine from the vineyards they have planted. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s great day of judgment is almost here;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is approaching very rapidly!</p>
<p class="poetry">There will be a bitter sound on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s day of judgment;</p>
<p class="poetry">at that time warriors will cry out in battle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> That day will be a day of God’s anger, </p>
<p class="poetry">a day of distress and hardship,</p>
<p class="poetry">a day of devastation and ruin,</p>
<p class="poetry">a day of darkness and gloom,</p>
<p class="poetry">a day of clouds and dark skies, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> a day of trumpet blasts and battle cries. </p>
<p class="poetry">Judgment will fall on the fortified cities and the high corner towers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> I will bring distress on the people </p>
<p class="poetry">and they will stumble like blind men,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they have sinned against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their blood will be poured out like dirt;</p>
<p class="poetry">their flesh will be scattered like manure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:18</span> Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to deliver them</p>
<p class="poetry">in the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s angry judgment.</p>
<p class="poetry">The whole earth will be consumed by his fiery wrath. </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, he will bring terrifying destruction on all who live on the earth.” </p>

</body>
</html>