<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) John 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Pilate Tries to Release Jesus </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:1</span> Then Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged severely. <span class="verse">19:2</span> The soldiers braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and they clothed him in a purple robe. <span class="verse">19:3</span> They came up to him again and again and said, “Hail, king of the Jews!” And they struck him repeatedly in the face. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:4</span> Again Pilate went out and said to the Jewish leaders, “Look, I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find no reason for an accusation against him.” <span class="verse">19:5</span> So Jesus came outside, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. Pilate said to them, “Look, here is the man!” <span class="verse">19:6</span> When the chief priests and their officers saw him, they shouted out, “Crucify him! Crucify him!” Pilate said, “You take him and crucify him! Certainly I find no reason for an accusation against him!” <span class="verse">19:7</span> The Jewish leaders replied, “We have a law, and according to our law he ought to die, because he claimed to be the Son of God!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:8</span> When Pilate heard what they said, he was more afraid than ever, <span class="verse">19:9</span> and he went back into the governor’s residence and said to Jesus, “Where do you come from?” But Jesus gave him no answer. <span class="verse">19:10</span> So Pilate said, “Do you refuse to speak to me? Don’t you know I have the authority to release you, and to crucify you?” <span class="verse">19:11</span> Jesus replied, “You would have no authority over me at all, unless it was given to you from above. Therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty of greater sin.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:12</span> From this point on, Pilate tried to release him. But the Jewish leaders shouted out, “If you release this man, you are no friend of Caesar! Everyone who claims to be a king opposes Caesar!” <span class="verse">19:13</span> When Pilate heard these words he brought Jesus outside and sat down on the judgment seat in the place called “The Stone Pavement” (<i>Gabbatha</i> in Aramaic). <span class="verse">19:14</span> (Now it was the day of preparation for the Passover, about noon.) Pilate said to the Jewish leaders, “Look, here is your king!”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:15</span> Then they shouted out, “Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!” Pilate asked, “Shall I crucify your king?” The high priests replied, “We have no king except Caesar!” <span class="verse">19:16</span> Then Pilate handed him over to them to be crucified.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Crucifixion</p><p class="bodytext">So they took Jesus, <span class="verse">19:17</span> and carrying his own cross he went out to the place called “The Place of the Skull” (called in Aramaic <i>Golgotha</i>). <span class="verse">19:18</span> There they crucified him along with two others, one on each side, with Jesus in the middle. <span class="verse">19:19</span> Pilate also had a notice written and fastened to the cross, which read: “Jesus the Nazarene, the king of the Jews.” <span class="verse">19:20</span> Thus many of the Jewish residents of Jerusalem read this notice, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and the notice was written in Aramaic, Latin, and Greek. <span class="verse">19:21</span> Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write, ‘The king of the Jews,’ but rather, ‘This man said, I am king of the Jews.’” <span class="verse">19:22</span> Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:23</span> Now when the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and made four shares, one for each soldier, and the tunic remained. (Now the tunic was seamless, woven from top to bottom as a single piece.) <span class="verse">19:24</span> So the soldiers said to one another, “Let’s not tear it, but throw dice to see who will get it.” This took place to fulfill the scripture that says, “<b><i>They divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they threw dice</i></b>.” So the soldiers did these things. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:25</span> Now standing beside Jesus’ cross were his mother, his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. <span class="verse">19:26</span> So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother, “Woman, look, here is your son!” <span class="verse">19:27</span> He then said to his disciple, “Look, here is your mother!” From that very time the disciple took her into his own home. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Death </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:28</span> After this Jesus, realizing that by this time everything was completed, said (in order to fulfill the scripture), “I am thirsty!” <span class="verse">19:29</span> A jar full of sour wine was there, so they put a sponge soaked in sour wine on a branch of hyssop and lifted it to his mouth. <span class="verse">19:30</span> When he had received the sour wine, Jesus said, “It is completed!” Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:31</span> Then, because it was the day of preparation, so that the bodies should not stay on the crosses on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was an especially important one), the Jewish leaders asked Pilate to have the victims’ legs broken and the bodies taken down. <span class="verse">19:32</span> So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the two men who had been crucified with Jesus, first the one and then the other. <span class="verse">19:33</span> But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs. <span class="verse">19:34</span> But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and blood and water flowed out immediately. <span class="verse">19:35</span> And the person who saw it has testified (and his testimony is true, and he knows that he is telling the truth), so that you also may believe. <span class="verse">19:36</span> For these things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled, “<b><i>Not a bone of his will be broken</i></b>.” <span class="verse">19:37</span> And again another scripture says, “<b><i>They will look on the one whom they have pierced</i></b>.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Burial </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:38</span> After this, Joseph of Arimathea, a disciple of Jesus (but secretly, because he feared the Jewish leaders), asked Pilate if he could remove the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him permission, so he went and took the body away. <span class="verse">19:39</span> Nicodemus, the man who had previously come to Jesus at night, accompanied Joseph, carrying a mixture of myrrh and aloes weighing about seventy-five pounds. <span class="verse">19:40</span> Then they took Jesus’ body and wrapped it, with the aromatic spices, in strips of linen cloth according to Jewish burial customs. <span class="verse">19:41</span> Now at the place where Jesus was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden was a new tomb where no one had yet been buried. <span class="verse">19:42</span> And so, because it was the Jewish day of preparation and the tomb was nearby, they placed Jesus’ body there.</p>

</body>
</html>