<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 46</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 46</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Family of Jacob goes to Egypt</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">46:1</span> So Israel began his journey, taking with him all that he had. When he came to Beer Sheba he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. <span class="verse">46:2</span> God spoke to Israel in a vision during the night and said, “Jacob, Jacob!” He replied, “Here I am!” <span class="verse">46:3</span> He said, “I am God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make you into a great nation there. <span class="verse">46:4</span> I will go down with you to Egypt and I myself will certainly bring you back from there. Joseph will close your eyes.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">46:5</span> Then Jacob started out from Beer Sheba, and the sons of Israel carried their father Jacob, their little children, and their wives in the wagons that Pharaoh had sent along to transport him. <span class="verse">46:6</span> Jacob and all his descendants took their livestock and the possessions they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and they went to Egypt. <span class="verse">46:7</span> He brought with him to Egypt his sons and grandsons, his daughters and granddaughters—all his descendants. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">46:8</span> These are the names of the sons of Israel who went to Egypt—Jacob and his sons: Reuben, the firstborn of Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:9</span> The sons of Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:10</span> The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jakin, Zohar, and Shaul (the son of a Canaanite woman).</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:11</span> The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:12</span> The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah (but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan).</p>
<p class="poetry">The sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:13</span> The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:14</span> The sons of Zebulun: Sered, Elon, and Jahleel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:15</span> These were the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan Aram, along with Dinah his daughter. His sons and daughters numbered thirty-three in all. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:16</span> The sons of Gad: Zephon, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi, and Areli. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:17</span> The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and Serah their sister.</p>
<p class="poetry">The sons of Beriah were Heber and Malkiel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:18</span> These were the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter. She bore these to Jacob, sixteen in all.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:19</span> The sons of Rachel the wife of Jacob: Joseph and Benjamin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:20</span> Manasseh and Ephraim were born to Joseph in the land of Egypt. Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bore them to him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:21</span> The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Beker, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim and Ard. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:22</span> These were the sons of Rachel who were born to Jacob, fourteen in all. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:23</span> The son of Dan: Hushim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:24</span> The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:25</span> These were the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel his daughter. She bore these to Jacob, seven in all. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">46:26</span> All the direct descendants of Jacob who went to Egypt with him were sixty-six in number. (This number does not include the wives of Jacob’s sons.) <span class="verse">46:27</span> Counting the two sons of Joseph who were born to him in Egypt, all the people of the household of Jacob who were in Egypt numbered seventy. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">46:28</span> Jacob sent Judah before him to Joseph to accompany him to Goshen. So they came to the land of Goshen. <span class="verse">46:29</span> Joseph harnessed his chariot and went up to meet his father Israel in Goshen. When he met him, he hugged his neck and wept on his neck for quite some time. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">46:30</span> Israel said to Joseph, “Now let me die since I have seen your face and know that you are still alive.” <span class="verse">46:31</span> Then Joseph said to his brothers and his father’s household, “I will go up and tell Pharaoh, ‘My brothers and my father’s household who were in the land of Canaan have come to me. <span class="verse">46:32</span> The men are shepherds; they take care of livestock. They have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have.’ <span class="verse">46:33</span> Pharaoh will summon you and say, ‘What is your occupation?’ <span class="verse">46:34</span> Tell him, ‘Your servants have taken care of cattle from our youth until now, both we and our fathers,’ so that you may live in the land of Goshen, for everyone who takes care of sheep is disgusting to the Egyptians.” </p>

</body>
</html>