<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 18</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 18</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant David, who sang to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> the words of this song when the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rescued him from the power of all his enemies, including Saul. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:1</span> He said: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I love you, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my source of strength! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is my high ridge, my stronghold, my deliverer.</p>
<p class="poetry">My God is my rocky summit where I take shelter, </p>
<p class="poetry">my shield, the horn that saves me, and my refuge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:3</span> I called to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who is worthy of praise, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I was delivered from my enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:4</span> The waves of death engulfed me,</p>
<p class="poetry">the currents of chaos overwhelmed me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:5</span> The ropes of Sheol tightened around me, </p>
<p class="poetry">the snares of death trapped me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:6</span> In my distress I called to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">I cried out to my God. </p>
<p class="poetry">From his heavenly temple he heard my voice;</p>
<p class="poetry">he listened to my cry for help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:7</span> The earth heaved and shook. </p>
<p class="poetry">The roots of the mountains trembled; </p>
<p class="poetry">they heaved because he was angry. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:8</span> Smoke ascended from his nose; </p>
<p class="poetry">fire devoured as it came from his mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry">He hurled down fiery coals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:9</span> He made the sky sink as he descended;</p>
<p class="poetry">a thick cloud was under his feet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:10</span> He mounted a winged angel and flew;</p>
<p class="poetry">he glided on the wings of the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:11</span> He shrouded himself in darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">in thick rain clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:12</span> From the brightness in front of him came</p>
<p class="poetry">hail and fiery coals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> thundered in the sky;</p>
<p class="poetry">the Most High shouted. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:14</span> He shot his arrows and scattered them, </p>
<p class="poetry">many lightning bolts and routed them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:15</span> The depths of the sea were exposed;</p>
<p class="poetry">the inner regions of the world were uncovered</p>
<p class="poetry">by your battle cry, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the powerful breath from your nose. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:16</span> He reached down from above and took hold of me;</p>
<p class="poetry">he pulled me from the surging water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:17</span> He rescued me from my strong enemy, </p>
<p class="poetry">from those who hate me,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they were too strong for me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:18</span> They confronted me in my day of calamity,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> helped me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:19</span> He brought me out into a wide open place;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivered me because he was pleased with me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:20</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> repaid me for my godly deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">he rewarded my blameless behavior. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:21</span> For I have obeyed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s commands; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have not rebelled against my God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:22</span> For I am aware of all his regulations, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I do not reject his rules. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:23</span> I was innocent before him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and kept myself from sinning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:24</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rewarded me for my godly deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">he took notice of my blameless behavior. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:25</span> You prove to be loyal to one who is faithful; </p>
<p class="poetry">you prove to be trustworthy to one who is innocent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:26</span> You prove to be reliable to one who is blameless,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you prove to be deceptive to one who is perverse. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:27</span> For you deliver oppressed people,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you bring down those who have a proud look. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:28</span> Indeed, you light my lamp, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry">My God illuminates the darkness around me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:29</span> Indeed, with your help I can charge against an army; </p>
<p class="poetry">by my God’s power I can jump over a wall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:30</span> The one true God acts in a faithful manner; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s promise is reliable. </p>
<p class="poetry">He is a shield to all who take shelter in him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:31</span> Indeed, who is God besides the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who is a protector besides our God? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:32</span> The one true God gives me strength; </p>
<p class="poetry">he removes the obstacles in my way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:33</span> He gives me the agility of a deer; </p>
<p class="poetry">he enables me to negotiate the rugged terrain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:34</span> He trains my hands for battle; </p>
<p class="poetry">my arms can bend even the strongest bow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:35</span> You give me your protective shield; </p>
<p class="poetry">your right hand supports me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your willingness to help enables me to prevail. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:36</span> You widen my path; </p>
<p class="poetry">my feet do not slip. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:37</span> I chase my enemies and catch them;</p>
<p class="poetry">I do not turn back until I wipe them out.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:38</span> I beat them to death; </p>
<p class="poetry">they fall at my feet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:39</span> You give me strength for battle;</p>
<p class="poetry">you make my foes kneel before me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:40</span> You make my enemies retreat; </p>
<p class="poetry">I destroy those who hate me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:41</span> They cry out, but there is no one to help them; </p>
<p class="poetry">they cry out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, but he does not answer them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:42</span> I grind them as fine windblown dust; </p>
<p class="poetry">I beat them underfoot like clay in the streets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:43</span> You rescue me from a hostile army. </p>
<p class="poetry">You make me a leader of nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">people over whom I had no authority are now my subjects. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:44</span> When they hear of my exploits, they submit to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Foreigners are powerless before me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:45</span> Foreigners lose their courage; </p>
<p class="poetry">they shake with fear as they leave their strongholds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:46</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is alive! </p>
<p class="poetry">My Protector is praiseworthy. </p>
<p class="poetry">The God who delivers me is exalted as king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:47</span> The one true God completely vindicates me; </p>
<p class="poetry">he makes nations submit to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:48</span> He delivers me from my enemies.</p>
<p class="poetry">You snatch me away from those who attack me; </p>
<p class="poetry">you rescue me from violent men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:49</span> So I will give you thanks before the nations, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:50</span> He gives his king magnificent victories; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is faithful to his chosen ruler, </p>
<p class="poetry">to David and his descendants forever.” </p>

</body>
</html>