<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezra 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezra<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Names of the Returning Exiles</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span>  These are the people of the province who were going up, from the captives of the exile whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had forced into exile in Babylon. They returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city. <span class="verse">2:2</span> They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, and Baanah. </p>
<p class="bodytext">The number of Israelites was as follows: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:3</span> the descendants of Parosh: 2,172;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> the descendants of Shephatiah: 372;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:5</span> the descendants of Arah: 775;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:6</span> the descendants of Pahath Moab (from the line of Jeshua and Joab): 2,812;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:7</span> the descendants of Elam: 1,254;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:8</span> the descendants of Zattu: 945;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:9</span> the descendants of Zaccai: 760;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:10</span> the descendants of Bani: 642;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> the descendants of Bebai: 623;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:12</span> the descendants of Azgad: 1,222;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:13</span> the descendants of Adonikam: 666;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> the descendants of Bigvai: 2,056;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:15</span> the descendants of Adin: 454;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:16</span> the descendants of Ater (through Hezekiah): 98;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:17</span> the descendants of Bezai: 323;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:18</span> the descendants of Jorah: 112;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:19</span> the descendants of Hashum: 223;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:20</span> the descendants of Gibbar: 95.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:21</span> The men of Bethlehem: 123;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:22</span> the men of Netophah: 56;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:23</span> the men of Anathoth: 128;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:24</span> the men of the family of Azmaveth: 42;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:25</span> the men of Kiriath Jearim, Kephirah and Beeroth: 743;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:26</span> the men of Ramah and Geba: 621;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:27</span> the men of Micmash: 122;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:28</span> the men of Bethel and Ai: 223;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:29</span> the descendants of Nebo: 52;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:30</span> the descendants of Magbish: 156;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:31</span> the descendants of the other Elam: 1,254;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:32</span> the descendants of Harim: 320;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:33</span> the men of Lod, Hadid, and Ono: 725;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:34</span> the men of Jericho: 345;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:35</span> the descendants of Senaah: 3,630. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:36</span> The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah (through the family of Jeshua): 973;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:37</span> the descendants of Immer: 1,052;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:38</span> the descendants of Pashhur: 1,247;</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:39</span> the descendants of Harim: 1,017.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:40</span> The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua and Kadmiel (through the line of Hodaviah): 74.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:41</span> The singers: the descendants of Asaph: 128.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:42</span> The gatekeepers: the descendants of Shallum, the descendants of Ater, the descendants of Talmon, the descendants of Akkub, the descendants of Hatita, and the descendants of Shobai: 139.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:43</span> The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, the descendants of Hasupha, the descendants of Tabbaoth, <span class="verse">2:44</span> the descendants of Keros, the descendants of Siaha, the descendants of Padon, <span class="verse">2:45</span> the descendants of Lebanah, the descendants of Hagabah, the descendants of Akkub, <span class="verse">2:46</span> the descendants of Hagab, the descendants of Shalmai, the descendants of Hanan, <span class="verse">2:47</span> the descendants of Giddel, the descendants of Gahar, the descendants of Reaiah, <span class="verse">2:48</span> the descendants of Rezin, the descendants of Nekoda, the descendants of Gazzam, <span class="verse">2:49</span> the descendants of Uzzah, the descendants of Paseah, the descendants of Besai, <span class="verse">2:50</span> the descendants of Asnah, the descendants of Meunim, the descendants of Nephussim, <span class="verse">2:51</span> the descendants of Bakbuk, the descendants of Hakupha, the descendants of Harhur, <span class="verse">2:52</span> the descendants of Bazluth, the descendants of Mehida, the descendants of Harsha, <span class="verse">2:53</span> the descendants of Barkos, the descendants of Sisera, the descendants of Temah, <span class="verse">2:54</span> the descendants of Neziah, and the descendants of Hatipha. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:55</span> The descendants of the servants of Solomon: the descendants of Sotai, the descendants of Hassophereth, the descendants of Peruda, <span class="verse">2:56</span> the descendants of Jaala, the descendants of Darkon, the descendants of Giddel, <span class="verse">2:57</span> the descendants of Shephatiah, the descendants of Hattil, the descendants of Pokereth Hazzebaim, and the descendants of Ami. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:58</span> All the temple servants and the descendants of the servants of Solomon: 392.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:59</span> These are the ones that came up from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha, Kerub, Addon, and Immer (although they were unable to certify their family connection or their ancestry, as to whether they really were from Israel): </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:60</span> the descendants of Delaiah, the descendants of Tobiah, and the descendants of Nekoda: 652.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:61</span> And from among the priests: the descendants of Hobaiah, the descendants of Hakkoz, and the descendants of Barzillai (who had taken a wife from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite and was called by that name). <span class="verse">2:62</span> They searched for their records in the genealogical materials, but did not find them. They were therefore excluded from the priesthood. <span class="verse">2:63</span> The governor instructed them not to eat any of the sacred food until there was a priest who could consult the Urim and Thummim. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:64</span> The entire group numbered 42,360, <span class="verse">2:65</span> not counting their male and female servants, who numbered 7,337. They also had 200 male and female singers <span class="verse">2:66</span> and 736 horses, 245 mules, <span class="verse">2:67</span> 435 camels, and 6,720 donkeys. <span class="verse">2:68</span> When they came to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple in Jerusalem, some of the family leaders offered voluntary offerings for the temple of God in order to rebuild it on its site. <span class="verse">2:69</span> As they were able, they gave to the treasury for this work 61,000 drachmas of gold, 5,000 minas of silver, and 100 priestly robes. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:70</span> The priests, the Levites, some of the people, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants lived in their towns, and all the rest of Israel lived in their towns. </p>

</body>
</html>