<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 32</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 32</h2><p class="psasuper">By David; a well-written song. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:1</span> How blessed is the one whose rebellious acts are forgiven, </p>
<p class="poetry">whose sin is pardoned. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:2</span> How blessed is the one whose wrongdoing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does not punish, </p>
<p class="poetry">in whose spirit there is no deceit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:3</span> When I refused to confess my sin, </p>
<p class="poetry">my whole body wasted away, </p>
<p class="poetry">while I groaned in pain all day long.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:4</span> For day and night you tormented me; </p>
<p class="poetry">you tried to destroy me in the intense heat of summer. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:5</span> Then I confessed my sin;</p>
<p class="poetry">I no longer covered up my wrongdoing.</p>
<p class="poetry">I said, “I will confess my rebellious acts to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>
<p class="poetry">And then you forgave my sins. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:6</span> For this reason every one of your faithful followers should pray to you</p>
<p class="poetry">while there is a window of opportunity. </p>
<p class="poetry">Certainly when the surging water rises,</p>
<p class="poetry">it will not reach them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:7</span> You are my hiding place;</p>
<p class="poetry">you protect me from distress.</p>
<p class="poetry">You surround me with shouts of joy from those celebrating deliverance. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:8</span> I will instruct and teach you about how you should live. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will advise you as I look you in the eye. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:9</span> Do not be like an unintelligent horse or mule, </p>
<p class="poetry">which will not obey you</p>
<p class="poetry">unless they are controlled by a bridle and bit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:10</span> An evil person suffers much pain, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s faithfulness overwhelms the one who trusts in him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:11</span> Rejoice in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and be happy, you who are godly!</p>
<p class="poetry">Shout for joy, all you who are morally upright! </p>

</body>
</html>