<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Malachi 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Malachi<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Sacrilege of the Priestly Message</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> “Now, you priests, this commandment is for you. <span class="verse">2:2</span> If you do not listen and take seriously the need to honor my name,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, “I will send judgment on you and turn your blessings into curses—indeed, I have already done so because you are not taking it to heart. <span class="verse">2:3</span> I am about to discipline your children and will spread offal on your faces, the very offal produced at your festivals, and you will be carried away along with it. <span class="verse">2:4</span> Then you will know that I sent this commandment to you so that my covenant may continue to be with Levi,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. <span class="verse">2:5</span> “My covenant with him was designed to bring life and peace. I gave its statutes to him to fill him with awe, and he indeed revered me and stood in awe before me. <span class="verse">2:6</span> He taught what was true; sinful words were not found on his lips. He walked with me in peace and integrity, and he turned many people away from sin. <span class="verse">2:7</span> For the lips of a priest should preserve knowledge of sacred things, and people should seek instruction from him because he is the messenger of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. <span class="verse">2:8</span> You, however, have turned from the way. You have caused many to violate the law; you have corrupted the covenant with Levi,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. <span class="verse">2:9</span> “Therefore, I have caused you to be ignored and belittled before all people to the extent that you are not following after me and are showing partiality in your instruction.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Rebellion of the People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:10</span> Do we not all have one father? Did not one God create us? Why do we betray one another, thus making light of the covenant of our ancestors? <span class="verse">2:11</span> Judah has become disloyal, and unspeakable sins have been committed in Israel and Jerusalem. For Judah has profaned the holy things that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> loves and has turned to a foreign god! <span class="verse">2:12</span> May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> cut off from the community of Jacob every last person who does this, as well as the person who presents improper offerings to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:13</span> You also do this: You cover the altar of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with tears as you weep and groan, because he no longer pays any attention to the offering nor accepts it favorably from you. <span class="verse">2:14</span> Yet you ask, “Why?” The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is testifying against you on behalf of the wife you married when you were young, to whom you have become unfaithful even though she is your companion and wife by law. <span class="verse">2:15</span> No one who has even a small portion of the Spirit in him does this. What did our ancestor do when seeking a child from God? Be attentive, then, to your own spirit, for one should not be disloyal to the wife he took in his youth. <span class="verse">2:16</span> “I hate divorce,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel, “and the one who is guilty of violence,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. “Pay attention to your conscience, and do not be unfaithful.” </p>

</body>
</html>