<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Corinthians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Why Paul Postponed His Visit</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:23</span> Now I appeal to God as my witness, that to spare you I did not come again to Corinth. <span class="verse">1:24</span> I do not mean that we rule over your faith, but we are workers with you for your joy, because by faith you stand firm. <span class="verse">2:1</span> So I made up my own mind not to pay you another painful visit. <span class="verse">2:2</span> For if I make you sad, who would be left to make me glad but the one I caused to be sad? <span class="verse">2:3</span> And I wrote this very thing to you, so that when I came I would not have sadness from those who ought to make me rejoice, since I am confident in you all that my joy would be yours. <span class="verse">2:4</span> For out of great distress and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears, not to make you sad, but to let you know the love that I have especially for you. <span class="verse">2:5</span> But if anyone has caused sadness, he has not saddened me alone, but to some extent (not to exaggerate) he has saddened all of you as well. <span class="verse">2:6</span> This punishment on such an individual by the majority is enough for him, <span class="verse">2:7</span> so that now instead you should rather forgive and comfort him. This will keep him from being overwhelmed by excessive grief to the point of despair. <span class="verse">2:8</span> Therefore I urge you to reaffirm your love for him. <span class="verse">2:9</span> For this reason also I wrote you: to test you to see if you are obedient in everything. <span class="verse">2:10</span> If you forgive anyone for anything, I also forgive him—for indeed what I have forgiven (if I have forgiven anything) I did so for you in the presence of Christ, <span class="verse">2:11</span> so that we may not be exploited by Satan (for we are not ignorant of his schemes). <span class="verse">2:12</span> Now when I arrived in Troas to proclaim the gospel of Christ, even though the Lord had opened a door of opportunity for me, <span class="verse">2:13</span> I had no relief in my spirit, because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I said goodbye to them and set out for Macedonia. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Apostolic Ministry</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> But thanks be to God who always leads us in triumphal procession in Christ and who makes known through us the fragrance that consists of the knowledge of him in every place. <span class="verse">2:15</span> For we are a sweet aroma of Christ to God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing— <span class="verse">2:16</span> to the latter an odor from death to death, but to the former a fragrance from life to life. And who is adequate for these things? <span class="verse">2:17</span> For we are not like so many others, hucksters who peddle the word of God for profit, but we are speaking in Christ before God as persons of sincerity, as persons sent from God. </p>

</body>
</html>