<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Revelation 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Revelation<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Thousand Year Reign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:1</span> Then I saw an angel descending from heaven, holding in his hand the key to the abyss and a huge chain. <span class="verse">20:2</span> He seized the dragon—the ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan—and tied him up for a thousand years. <span class="verse">20:3</span> The angel then threw him into the abyss and locked and sealed it so that he could not deceive the nations until the one thousand years were finished. (After these things he must be released for a brief period of time.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:4</span> Then I saw thrones and seated on them were those who had been given authority to judge. I also saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of the testimony about Jesus and because of the word of God. These had not worshiped the beast or his image and had refused to receive his mark on their forehead or hand. They came to life and reigned with Christ for a thousand years. <span class="verse">20:5</span> (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were finished.) This is the first resurrection. <span class="verse">20:6</span> Blessed and holy is the one who takes part in the first resurrection. The second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and they will reign with him for a thousand years. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Satan’s Final Defeat</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:7</span> Now when the thousand years are finished, Satan will be released from his prison <span class="verse">20:8</span> and will go out to deceive the nations at the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to bring them together for the battle. They are as numerous as the grains of sand in the sea. <span class="verse">20:9</span> They went up on the broad plain of the earth and encircled the camp of the saints and the beloved city, but fire came down from heaven and devoured them completely. <span class="verse">20:10</span> And the devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet are too, and they will be tormented there day and night forever and ever. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Great White Throne</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:11</span> Then I saw a large white throne and the one who was seated on it; the earth and the heaven fled from his presence, and no place was found for them. <span class="verse">20:12</span> And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne. Then books were opened, and another book was opened—the book of life. So the dead were judged by what was written in the books, according to their deeds. <span class="verse">20:13</span> The sea gave up the dead that were in it, and Death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each one was judged according to his deeds. <span class="verse">20:14</span> Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death—the lake of fire. <span class="verse">20:15</span> If anyone’s name was not found written in the book of life, that person was thrown into the lake of fire. </p>

</body>
</html>