<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Commissions Joshua</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> After Moses the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant died, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Joshua son of Nun, Moses’ assistant: <span class="verse">1:2</span> “Moses my servant is dead. Get ready! Cross the Jordan River. Lead these people into the land that I am ready to hand over to them. <span class="verse">1:3</span> I am handing over to you every place you set foot, as I promised Moses. <span class="verse">1:4</span> Your territory will extend from the desert in the south to Lebanon in the north. It will extend all the way to the great River Euphrates in the east (including all Syria) and all the way to the Mediterranean Sea in the west. <span class="verse">1:5</span> No one will be able to resist you all the days of your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with you. I will not abandon you or leave you alone. <span class="verse">1:6</span> Be strong and brave! You must lead these people in the conquest of this land that I solemnly promised their ancestors I would hand over to them. <span class="verse">1:7</span> Make sure you are very strong and brave! Carefully obey all the law my servant Moses charged you to keep. Do not swerve from it to the right or to the left, so that you may be successful in all you do. <span class="verse">1:8</span> This law scroll must not leave your lips. You must memorize it day and night so you can carefully obey all that is written in it. Then you will prosper and be successful. <span class="verse">1:9</span> I repeat, be strong and brave! Don’t be afraid and don’t panic, for I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, am with you in all you do.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Joshua Prepares for the Invasion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:10</span> Joshua instructed the leaders of the people: <span class="verse">1:11</span> “Go through the camp and command the people, ‘Prepare your supplies, for within three days you will cross the Jordan River and begin the conquest of the land the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is ready to hand over to you.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:12</span> Joshua told the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh: <span class="verse">1:13</span> “Remember what Moses the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant commanded you. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is giving you a place to settle and is handing this land over to you. <span class="verse">1:14</span> Your wives, children, and cattle may stay in the land that Moses assigned to you east of the Jordan River. But all of you warriors must cross over armed for battle ahead of your brothers. You must help them <span class="verse">1:15</span> until the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> gives your brothers a place like yours to settle and they conquer the land the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is ready to hand over to them. Then you may go back to your allotted land and occupy the land Moses the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant assigned you east of the Jordan.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:16</span> They told Joshua, “We will do everything you say. We will go wherever you send us. <span class="verse">1:17</span> Just as we obeyed Moses, so we will obey you. But may the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God be with you as he was with Moses. <span class="verse">1:18</span> Any man who rebels against what you say and does not obey all your commands will be executed. But be strong and brave!” </p>

</body>
</html>