<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 25</h2><p class="psasuper">By David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I come before you in prayer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:2</span> My God, I trust in you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Please do not let me be humiliated;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not let my enemies triumphantly rejoice over me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:3</span> Certainly none who rely on you will be humiliated.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who deal in treachery will be thwarted and humiliated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:4</span> Make me understand your ways, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Teach me your paths. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:5</span> Guide me into your truth and teach me.</p>
<p class="poetry">For you are the God who delivers me;</p>
<p class="poetry">on you I rely all day long.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:6</span> Remember your compassionate and faithful deeds, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">for you have always acted in this manner. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:7</span> Do not hold against me the sins of my youth or my rebellious acts.</p>
<p class="poetry">Because you are faithful to me, extend to me your favor, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is both kind and fair; </p>
<p class="poetry">that is why he teaches sinners the right way to live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:9</span> May he show the humble what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry">May he teach the humble his way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> always proves faithful and reliable </p>
<p class="poetry">to those who follow the demands of his covenant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:11</span> For the sake of your reputation, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">forgive my sin, because it is great. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:12</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> shows his faithful followers</p>
<p class="poetry">the way they should live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:13</span> They experience his favor; </p>
<p class="poetry">their descendants inherit the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s loyal followers receive his guidance, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he reveals his covenantal demands to them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:15</span> I continually look to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for help, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he will free my feet from the enemy’s net. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:16</span> Turn toward me and have mercy on me,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I am alone and oppressed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:17</span> Deliver me from my distress; </p>
<p class="poetry">rescue me from my suffering. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:18</span> See my pain and suffering.</p>
<p class="poetry">Forgive all my sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:19</span> Watch my enemies, for they outnumber me;</p>
<p class="poetry">they hate me and want to harm me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:20</span> Protect me and deliver me!</p>
<p class="poetry">Please do not let me be humiliated,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I have taken shelter in you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:21</span> May integrity and godliness protect me,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I rely on you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:22</span> O God, rescue Israel</p>
<p class="poetry">from all their distress! </p>

</body>
</html>