<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 102</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 102</h2><p class="psasuper">The prayer of an oppressed man, as he grows faint and pours out his lament before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, hear my prayer.</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention to my cry for help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:2</span> Do not ignore me in my time of trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry">Listen to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">When I call out to you, quickly answer me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:3</span> For my days go up in smoke, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my bones are charred as in a fireplace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:4</span> My heart is parched and withered like grass,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I am unable to eat food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:5</span> Because of the anxiety that makes me groan,</p>
<p class="poetry">my bones protrude from my skin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:6</span> I am like an owl in the wilderness;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am like a screech owl among the ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:7</span> I stay awake; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am like a solitary bird on a roof. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:8</span> All day long my enemies taunt me;</p>
<p class="poetry">those who mock me use my name in their curses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:9</span> For I eat ashes as if they were bread, </p>
<p class="poetry">and mix my drink with my tears, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:10</span> because of your anger and raging fury.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, you pick me up and throw me away.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:11</span> My days are coming to an end, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I am withered like grass. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:12</span> But you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, rule forever, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your reputation endures. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:13</span> You will rise up and have compassion on Zion. </p>
<p class="poetry">For it is time to have mercy on her,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the appointed time has come. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:14</span> Indeed, your servants take delight in her stones,</p>
<p class="poetry">and feel compassion for the dust of her ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:15</span> The nations will respect the reputation of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all the kings of the earth will respect his splendor, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:16</span> when the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rebuilds Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">and reveals his splendor, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:17</span> when he responds to the prayer of the destitute, </p>
<p class="poetry">and does not reject their request. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:18</span> The account of his intervention will be recorded for future generations;</p>
<p class="poetry">people yet to be born will praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:19</span> For he will look down from his sanctuary above; </p>
<p class="poetry">from heaven the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will look toward earth, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:20</span> in order to hear the painful cries of the prisoners,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to set free those condemned to die, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:21</span> so they may proclaim the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">and praise him in Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:22</span> when the nations gather together,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the kingdoms pay tribute to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:23</span> He has taken away my strength in the middle of life; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has cut short my days. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:24</span> I say, “O my God, please do not take me away in the middle of my life. </p>
<p class="poetry">You endure through all generations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:25</span> In earlier times you established the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">the skies are your handiwork. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:26</span> They will perish,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you will endure. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will wear out like a garment;</p>
<p class="poetry">like clothes you will remove them and they will disappear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:27</span> But you remain; </p>
<p class="poetry">your years do not come to an end.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">102:28</span> The children of your servants will settle down here,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their descendants will live securely in your presence.” </p>

</body>
</html>