<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Fall of Jerusalem</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> A wind lifted me up and brought me to the east gate of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple that faces the east. There, at the entrance of the gate, I noticed twenty-five men. Among them I saw Jaazaniah son of Azzur and Pelatiah son of Benaiah, officials of the people. <span class="verse">11:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to me, “Son of man, these are the men who plot evil and give wicked advice in this city. <span class="verse">11:3</span> They say, ‘The time is not near to build houses; the city is a cooking pot, and we are the meat in it.’ <span class="verse">11:4</span> Therefore, prophesy against them! Prophesy, son of man!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:5</span> Then the Spirit of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> came upon me and said to me, “Say: ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: This is what you are thinking, O house of Israel; I know what goes through your minds. <span class="verse">11:6</span> You have killed many people in this city; you have filled its streets with corpses.’ <span class="verse">11:7</span> Therefore, this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: ‘The corpses you have dumped in the midst of the city are the meat, and this city is the cooking pot, but I will take you out of it. <span class="verse">11:8</span> You fear the sword, so the sword I will bring against you,’ declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">11:9</span> ‘But I will take you out of the city. And I will hand you over to foreigners. I will execute judgments on you. <span class="verse">11:10</span> You will die by the sword; I will judge you at the border of Israel. Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">11:11</span> This city will not be a cooking pot for you, and you will not be meat within it; I will judge you at the border of Israel. <span class="verse">11:12</span> Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, whose statutes you have not followed and whose regulations you have not carried out. Instead you have behaved according to the regulations of the nations around you!’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:13</span> Now, while I was prophesying, Pelatiah son of Benaiah died. Then I threw myself face down and cried out with a loud voice, “Alas, Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! You are completely wiping out the remnant of Israel!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:14</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">11:15</span> “Son of man, your brothers, your relatives, and the whole house of Israel, all of them are those to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, ‘They have gone far away from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; to us this land has been given as a possession.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:16</span> “Therefore say: ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Although I have removed them far away among the nations and have dispersed them among the countries, I have been a little sanctuary for them among the lands where they have gone.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:17</span> “Therefore say: ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: When I regather you from the peoples and assemble you from the lands where you have been dispersed, I will give you back the country of Israel.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:18</span> “When they return to it, they will remove from it all its detestable things and all its abominations. <span class="verse">11:19</span> I will give them one heart and I will put a new spirit within them; I will remove the hearts of stone from their bodies and I will give them tender hearts, <span class="verse">11:20</span> so that they may follow my statutes and observe my regulations and carry them out. Then they will be my people, and I will be their God. <span class="verse">11:21</span> But those whose hearts are devoted to detestable things and abominations, I hereby repay them for what they have done, says the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:22</span> Then the cherubim spread their wings with their wheels alongside them while the glory of the God of Israel hovered above them. <span class="verse">11:23</span> The glory of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rose up from within the city and stopped over the mountain east of it. <span class="verse">11:24</span> Then a wind lifted me up and carried me to the exiles in Babylonia, in the vision given to me by the Spirit of God. </p>
<p class="bodytext">Then the vision I had seen went up from me. <span class="verse">11:25</span> So I told the exiles everything the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had shown me.</p>

</body>
</html>