<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jehoshaphat Becomes King</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> His son Jehoshaphat replaced him as king and solidified his rule over Israel. <span class="verse">17:2</span> He placed troops in all Judah’s fortified cities and posted garrisons throughout the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim that his father Asa had seized. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was with Jehoshaphat because he followed in his ancestor David’s footsteps at the beginning of his reign. He did not seek the Baals, <span class="verse">17:4</span> but instead sought the God of his ancestors and obeyed his commands, unlike the Israelites. <span class="verse">17:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made his kingdom secure; all Judah brought tribute to Jehoshaphat, and he became very wealthy and greatly respected. <span class="verse">17:6</span> He was committed to following the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; he even removed the high places and Asherah poles from Judah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:7</span> In the third year of his reign he sent his officials Ben Hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah to teach in the cities of Judah. <span class="verse">17:8</span> They were accompanied by the Levites Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tob-Adonijah, and by the priests Elishama and Jehoram. <span class="verse">17:9</span> They taught throughout Judah, taking with them the scroll of the law of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. They traveled to all the cities of Judah and taught the people. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> put fear into all the kingdoms surrounding Judah; they did not make war with Jehoshaphat. <span class="verse">17:11</span> Some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat tribute, including a load of silver. The Arabs brought him 7,700 rams and 7,700 goats from their flocks. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:12</span> Jehoshaphat’s power kept increasing. He built fortresses and storage cities throughout Judah. <span class="verse">17:13</span> He had many supplies stored in the cities of Judah and an army of skilled warriors stationed in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">17:14</span> These were their divisions by families: </p>
<p class="bodytext">There were 1,000 officers from Judah. Adnah the commander led 300,000 skilled warriors, <span class="verse">17:15</span> Jehochanan the commander led 280,000, <span class="verse">17:16</span> and Amasiah son of Zikri, who volunteered to serve the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, led 200,000 skilled warriors. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:17</span> From Benjamin, Eliada, a skilled warrior, led 200,000 men who were equipped with bows and shields, <span class="verse">17:18</span> and Jehozabad led 180,000 trained warriors. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:19</span> These were the ones who served the king, besides those whom the king placed in the fortified cities throughout Judah. </p>

</body>
</html>