<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 40</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 40</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:1</span> I relied completely on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he turned toward me</p>
<p class="poetry">and heard my cry for help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:2</span> He lifted me out of the watery pit, </p>
<p class="poetry">out of the slimy mud. </p>
<p class="poetry">He placed my feet on a rock</p>
<p class="poetry">and gave me secure footing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:3</span> He gave me reason to sing a new song, </p>
<p class="poetry">praising our God. </p>
<p class="poetry">May many see what God has done,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that they might swear allegiance to him and trust in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:4</span> How blessed is the one who trusts in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> </p>
<p class="poetry">and does not seek help from the proud or from liars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:5</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my God, you have accomplished many things;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have done amazing things and carried out your purposes for us. </p>
<p class="poetry">No one can thwart you. </p>
<p class="poetry">I want to declare your deeds and talk about them,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they are too numerous to recount. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:6</span> Receiving sacrifices and offerings are not your primary concern. </p>
<p class="poetry">You make that quite clear to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">You do not ask for burnt sacrifices and sin offerings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:7</span> Then I say,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Look, I come!</p>
<p class="poetry">What is written in the scroll pertains to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:8</span> I want to do what pleases you, my God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your law dominates my thoughts.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:9</span> I have told the great assembly about your justice. </p>
<p class="poetry">Look, I spare no words. </p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you know this is true.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:10</span> I have not failed to tell about your justice; </p>
<p class="poetry">I spoke about your reliability and deliverance.</p>
<p class="poetry">I have not neglected to tell the great assembly about your loyal love and faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:11</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you do not withhold your compassion from me.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your loyal love and faithfulness continually protect me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:12</span> For innumerable dangers surround me.</p>
<p class="poetry">My sins overtake me</p>
<p class="poetry">so I am unable to see;</p>
<p class="poetry">they outnumber the hairs of my head</p>
<p class="poetry">so my strength fails me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:13</span> Please be willing, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, to rescue me!</p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, hurry and help me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:14</span> May those who are trying to snatch away my life</p>
<p class="poetry">be totally embarrassed and ashamed. </p>
<p class="poetry">May those who want to harm me</p>
<p class="poetry">be turned back and ashamed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:15</span> May those who say to me, “Aha! Aha!”</p>
<p class="poetry">be humiliated and disgraced. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:16</span> May all those who seek you be happy and rejoice in you.</p>
<p class="poetry">May those who love to experience your deliverance say continually, </p>
<p class="poetry">“May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> be praised!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:17</span> I am oppressed and needy. </p>
<p class="poetry">May the Lord pay attention to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">You are my helper and my deliverer.</p>
<p class="poetry">O my God, do not delay. </p>

</body>
</html>