<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">More Visions and Messages of Judgment</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> showed me this: I saw a basket of summer fruit. <span class="verse">8:2</span> He said, “What do you see, Amos?” I replied, “A basket of summer fruit.” Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to me, “The end has come for my people Israel! I will no longer overlook their sins. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:3</span> The women singing in the temple will wail in that day.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking. </p>
<p class="poetry">“There will be many corpses littered everywhere! Be quiet!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:4</span> Listen to this, you who trample the needy</p>
<p class="poetry">and do away with the destitute in the land.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:5</span> You say, </p>
<p class="poetry">“When will the new moon festival be over, so we can sell grain? </p>
<p class="poetry">When will the Sabbath end, so we can open up the grain bins? </p>
<p class="poetry">We’re eager to sell less for a higher price, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to cheat the buyer with rigged scales! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:6</span> We’re eager to trade silver for the poor, </p>
<p class="poetry">a pair of sandals for the needy.</p>
<p class="poetry">We want to mix in some chaff with the grain!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> confirms this oath by the arrogance of Jacob: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I swear I will never forget all you have done! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:8</span> Because of this the earth will quake, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all who live in it will mourn.</p>
<p class="poetry">The whole earth will rise like the Nile River, </p>
<p class="poetry">it will surge upward and then grow calm, like the Nile in Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> In that day,” says the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “I will make the sun set at noon</p>
<p class="poetry">and make the earth dark in the middle of the day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> I will turn your festivals into funerals </p>
<p class="poetry">and all your songs into funeral dirges.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will make everyone wear funeral clothes </p>
<p class="poetry">and cause every head to be shaved bald. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make you mourn as if you had lost your only son; </p>
<p class="poetry">when it ends it will indeed have been a bitter day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:11</span> Be certain of this, the time is coming,” says the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">“when I will send a famine through the land—</p>
<p class="poetry">not a shortage of food or water</p>
<p class="poetry">but an end to divine revelation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> People will stagger from sea to sea, </p>
<p class="poetry">and from the north around to the east. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will wander about looking for a message from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they will not find any. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:13</span> In that day your beautiful young women and your young men will faint from thirst. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:14</span> These are the ones who now take oaths in the name of the sinful idol goddess of Samaria. </p>
<p class="poetry">They vow, ‘As surely as your god lives, O Dan,’ or, ‘As surely as your beloved one lives, O Beer Sheba!’ </p>
<p class="poetry">But they will fall down and not get up again.” </p>

</body>
</html>