<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 26</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 26</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Isaac and Abimelech</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:1</span> There was a famine in the land, subsequent to the earlier famine that occurred in the days of Abraham. Isaac went to Abimelech king of the Philistines at Gerar. <span class="verse">26:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> appeared to Isaac and said, “Do not go down to Egypt; settle down in the land that I will point out to you. <span class="verse">26:3</span> Stay in this land. Then I will be with you and will bless you, for I will give all these lands to you and to your descendants, and I will fulfill the solemn promise I made to your father Abraham. <span class="verse">26:4</span> I will multiply your descendants so they will be as numerous as the stars in the sky, and I will give them all these lands. All the nations of the earth will pronounce blessings on one another using the name of your descendants. <span class="verse">26:5</span> All this will come to pass because Abraham obeyed me and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.” <span class="verse">26:6</span> So Isaac settled in Gerar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:7</span> When the men of that place asked him about his wife, he replied, “She is my sister.” He was afraid to say, “She is my wife,” for he thought to himself, “The men of this place will kill me to get Rebekah because she is very beautiful.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:8</span> After Isaac had been there a long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines happened to look out a window and observed Isaac caressing his wife Rebekah. <span class="verse">26:9</span> So Abimelech summoned Isaac and said, “She is really your wife! Why did you say, ‘She is my sister’?” Isaac replied, “Because I thought someone might kill me to get her.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:10</span> Then Abimelech exclaimed, “What in the world have you done to us? One of the men nearly took your wife to bed, and you would have brought guilt on us!” <span class="verse">26:11</span> So Abimelech commanded all the people, “Whoever touches this man or his wife will surely be put to death.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:12</span> When Isaac planted in that land, he reaped in the same year a hundred times what he had sown, because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> blessed him. <span class="verse">26:13</span> The man became wealthy. His influence continued to grow until he became very prominent. <span class="verse">26:14</span> He had so many sheep and cattle and such a great household of servants that the Philistines became jealous of him. <span class="verse">26:15</span> So the Philistines took dirt and filled up all the wells that his father’s servants had dug back in the days of his father Abraham. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:16</span> Then Abimelech said to Isaac, “Leave us and go elsewhere, for you have become much more powerful than we are.” <span class="verse">26:17</span> So Isaac left there and settled in the Gerar Valley. <span class="verse">26:18</span> Isaac reopened the wells that had been dug back in the days of his father Abraham, for the Philistines had stopped them up after Abraham died. Isaac gave these wells the same names his father had given them. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:19</span> When Isaac’s servants dug in the valley and discovered a well with fresh flowing water there, <span class="verse">26:20</span> the herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac’s herdsmen, saying, “The water belongs to us!” So Isaac named the well Esek because they argued with him about it. <span class="verse">26:21</span> His servants dug another well, but they quarreled over it too, so Isaac named it Sitnah. <span class="verse">26:22</span> Then he moved away from there and dug another well. They did not quarrel over it, so Isaac named it Rehoboth, saying, “For now the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has made room for us, and we will prosper in the land.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:23</span> From there Isaac went up to Beer Sheba. <span class="verse">26:24</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> appeared to him that night and said, “I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your descendants for the sake of my servant Abraham.” <span class="verse">26:25</span> Then Isaac built an altar there and worshiped the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. He pitched his tent there, and his servants dug a well. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:26</span> Now Abimelech had come to him from Gerar along with Ahuzzah his friend and Phicol the commander of his army. <span class="verse">26:27</span> Isaac asked them, “Why have you come to me? You hate me and sent me away from you.” <span class="verse">26:28</span> They replied, “We could plainly see that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is with you. So we decided there should be a pact between us —between us and you. Allow us to make a treaty with you <span class="verse">26:29</span> so that you will not do us any harm, just as we have not harmed you, but have always treated you well before sending you away in peace. Now you are blessed by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:30</span> So Isaac held a feast for them and they celebrated. <span class="verse">26:31</span> Early in the morning the men made a treaty with each other. Isaac sent them off; they separated on good terms. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:32</span> That day Isaac’s servants came and told him about the well they had dug. “We’ve found water,” they reported. <span class="verse">26:33</span> So he named it Shibah; that is why the name of the city has been Beer Sheba to this day. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:34</span> When Esau was forty years old, he married Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, as well as Basemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite. <span class="verse">26:35</span> They caused Isaac and Rebekah great anxiety. </p>

</body>
</html>