<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) James 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>James<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Passions and Pride</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Where do the conflicts and where do the quarrels among you come from? Is it not from this, from your passions that battle inside you? <span class="verse">4:2</span> You desire and you do not have; you murder and envy and you cannot obtain; you quarrel and fight. You do not have because you do not ask; <span class="verse">4:3</span> you ask and do not receive because you ask wrongly, so you can spend it on your passions. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Adulterers, do you not know that friendship with the world means hostility toward God? So whoever decides to be the world’s friend makes himself God’s enemy. <span class="verse">4:5</span> Or do you think the scripture means nothing when it says, “The spirit that God caused to live within us has an envious yearning”? <span class="verse">4:6</span> But he gives greater grace. Therefore it says, “<i><b>God opposes the proud, but he gives grace to the humble</b></i>.” <span class="verse">4:7</span> So submit to God. But resist the devil and he will flee from you. <span class="verse">4:8</span> Draw near to God and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and make your hearts pure, you double-minded. <span class="verse">4:9</span> Grieve, mourn, and weep. Turn your laughter into mourning and your joy into despair. <span class="verse">4:10</span> Humble yourselves before the Lord and he will exalt you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Do not speak against one another, brothers and sisters. He who speaks against a fellow believer or judges a fellow believer speaks against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law but its judge. <span class="verse">4:12</span> But there is only one who is lawgiver and judge—the one who is able to save and destroy. On the other hand, who are you to judge your neighbor? </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go into this or that town and spend a year there and do business and make a profit.” <span class="verse">4:14</span> You do not know about tomorrow. What is your life like? For you are a puff of smoke that appears for a short time and then vanishes. <span class="verse">4:15</span> You ought to say instead, “If the Lord is willing, then we will live and do this or that.” <span class="verse">4:16</span> But as it is, you boast about your arrogant plans. All such boasting is evil. <span class="verse">4:17</span> So whoever knows what is good to do and does not do it is guilty of sin. </p>

</body>
</html>