<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Organizes the Priests</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:1</span> The divisions of Aaron’s descendants were as follows:</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:2</span> Nadab and Abihu died before their father did; they had no sons. Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:3</span> David, Zadok (a descendant of Eleazar), and Ahimelech (a descendant of Ithamar) divided them into groups to carry out their assigned responsibilities. <span class="verse">24:4</span> The descendants of Eleazar had more leaders than the descendants of Ithamar, so they divided them up accordingly; the descendants of Eleazar had sixteen leaders, while the descendants of Ithamar had eight. <span class="verse">24:5</span> They divided them by lots, for there were officials of the Holy Place and officials designated by God among the descendants of both Eleazar and Ithamar. <span class="verse">24:6</span> The scribe Shemaiah son of Nethanel, a Levite, wrote down their names before the king, the officials, Zadok the priest, Ahimelech son of Abiathar, and the leaders of the priestly and Levite families. One family was drawn by lot from Eleazar, and then the next from Ithamar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:7</span> The first lot went to Jehoiarib,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the second to Jedaiah, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:8</span> the third to Harim,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the fourth to Seorim, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:9</span> the fifth to Malkijah,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the sixth to Mijamin, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:10</span> the seventh to Hakkoz,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the eighth to Abijah, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:11</span> the ninth to Jeshua,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the tenth to Shecaniah, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:12</span> the eleventh to Eliashib,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the twelfth to Jakim, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:13</span> the thirteenth to Huppah,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the fourteenth to Jeshebeab, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:14</span> the fifteenth to Bilgah,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the sixteenth to Immer, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:15</span> the seventeenth to Hezir,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the eighteenth to Happizzez, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:16</span> the nineteenth to Pethahiah,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the twentieth to Jehezkel, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:17</span> the twenty-first to Jakin,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the twenty-second to Gamul, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:18</span> the twenty-third to Delaiah,</p>
<p class="bodytext">the twenty-fourth to Maaziah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:19</span> This was the order in which they carried out their assigned responsibilities when they entered the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple, according to the regulations given them by their ancestor Aaron, just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel had instructed him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Remaining Levites</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:20</span> The rest of the Levites included: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Shubael from the sons of Amram,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Jehdeiah from the sons of Shubael, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:21</span> the firstborn Isshiah from Rehabiah and the sons of Rehabiah, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:22</span> Shelomoth from the Izharites,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Jahath from the sons of Shelomoth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:23</span> The sons of Hebron: Jeriah, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:24</span> The son of Uzziel: Micah;</p>
<p class="bodytext">Shamir from the sons of Micah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:25</span> The brother of Micah: Isshiah.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Zechariah from the sons of Isshiah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:26</span> The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The son of Jaaziah: Beno. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:27</span> The sons of Merari, from Jaaziah: Beno, Shoham, Zaccur, and Ibri. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:28</span> From Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:29</span> From Kish: Jerahmeel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:30</span> The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jerimoth.</p>
<p class="bodyblock">These were the Levites, listed by their families. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:31</span> Like their relatives, the descendants of Aaron, they also cast lots before King David, Zadok, Ahimelech, the leaders of families, the priests, and the Levites. The families of the oldest son cast lots along with those of the youngest. </p>

</body>
</html>