<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 58</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 58</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Desires Genuine Devotion</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:1</span> “Shout loudly! Don’t be quiet!</p>
<p class="poetry">Yell as loudly as a trumpet!</p>
<p class="poetry">Confront my people with their rebellious deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">confront Jacob’s family with their sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:2</span> They seek me day after day;</p>
<p class="poetry">they want to know my requirements, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a nation that does what is right</p>
<p class="poetry">and does not reject the law of their God.</p>
<p class="poetry">They ask me for just decrees;</p>
<p class="poetry">they want to be near God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:3</span> They lament, ‘Why don’t you notice when we fast?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why don’t you pay attention when we humble ourselves?’</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, at the same time you fast, you satisfy your selfish desires, </p>
<p class="poetry">you oppress your workers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:4</span> Look, your fasting is accompanied by arguments, brawls,</p>
<p class="poetry">and fistfights. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not fast as you do today,</p>
<p class="poetry">trying to make your voice heard in heaven. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:5</span> Is this really the kind of fasting I want? </p>
<p class="poetry">Do I want a day when people merely humble themselves, </p>
<p class="poetry">bowing their heads like a reed</p>
<p class="poetry">and stretching out on sackcloth and ashes?</p>
<p class="poetry">Is this really what you call a fast,</p>
<p class="poetry">a day that is pleasing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:6</span> No, this is the kind of fast I want: </p>
<p class="poetry">I want you to remove the sinful chains,</p>
<p class="poetry">to tear away the ropes of the burdensome yoke,</p>
<p class="poetry">to set free the oppressed, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to break every burdensome yoke. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:7</span> I want you to share your food with the hungry</p>
<p class="poetry">and to provide shelter for homeless, oppressed people. </p>
<p class="poetry">When you see someone naked, clothe them!</p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t turn your back on your own flesh and blood. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:8</span> Then your light will shine like the sunrise; </p>
<p class="poetry">your restoration will quickly arrive; </p>
<p class="poetry">your godly behavior will go before you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s splendor will be your rear guard. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:9</span> Then you will call out, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will respond;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will cry out, and he will reply, ‘Here I am.’</p>
<p class="poetry">You must remove the burdensome yoke from among you</p>
<p class="poetry">and stop pointing fingers and speaking sinfully. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:10</span> You must actively help the hungry</p>
<p class="poetry">and feed the oppressed. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then your light will dispel the darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your darkness will be transformed into noonday. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will continually lead you;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will feed you even in parched regions. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will give you renewed strength, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will be like a well-watered garden,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a spring that continually produces water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:12</span> Your perpetual ruins will be rebuilt; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will reestablish the ancient foundations.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will be called, ‘The one who repairs broken walls,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who makes the streets inhabitable again.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:13</span> You must observe the Sabbath </p>
<p class="poetry">rather than doing anything you please on my holy day. </p>
<p class="poetry">You must look forward to the Sabbath </p>
<p class="poetry">and treat the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s holy day with respect. </p>
<p class="poetry">You must treat it with respect by refraining from your normal activities,</p>
<p class="poetry">and by refraining from your selfish pursuits and from making business deals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:14</span> Then you will find joy in your relationship to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will give you great prosperity, </p>
<p class="poetry">and cause crops to grow on the land I gave to your ancestor Jacob.” </p>
<p class="poetry">Know for certain that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken. </p>

</body>
</html>