<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:1</span> Ephraim continually feeds on the wind;</p>
<p class="poetry">he chases the east wind all day;</p>
<p class="poetry">he multiplies lies and violence.</p>
<p class="poetry">They make treaties with Assyria,</p>
<p class="poetry">and send olive oil as tribute to Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> also has a covenant lawsuit against Judah;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will punish Jacob according to his ways</p>
<p class="poetry">and repay him according to his deeds. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Must Return to the God of Jacob</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:3</span> In the womb he attacked his brother;</p>
<p class="poetry">in his manly vigor he struggled with God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:4</span> He struggled with an angel and prevailed;</p>
<p class="poetry">he wept and begged for his favor.</p>
<p class="poetry">He found God at Bethel, </p>
<p class="poetry">and there he spoke with him! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:5</span> As for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God Almighty,</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is the name by which he is remembered! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:6</span> But you must return to your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">by maintaining love and justice</p>
<p class="poetry">and by waiting for your God to return to you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Refutes Israel’s False Claim of Innocence</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:7</span> The businessmen love to cheat; </p>
<p class="poetry">they use dishonest scales. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:8</span> Ephraim boasts, “I am very rich! </p>
<p class="poetry">I have become wealthy! </p>
<p class="poetry">In all that I have done to gain my wealth, </p>
<p class="poetry">no one can accuse me of any offense that is actually sinful.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:9</span> “I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God who brought you out of Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will make you live in tents again as in the days of old. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:10</span> I spoke to the prophets;</p>
<p class="poetry">I myself revealed many visions; </p>
<p class="poetry">I spoke in parables through the prophets.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:11</span> Is there idolatry in Gilead? </p>
<p class="poetry">Certainly its inhabitants will come to nothing! </p>
<p class="poetry">Do they sacrifice bulls in Gilgal?</p>
<p class="poetry">Surely their altars will be like stones heaped up on a plowed field! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jacob in Aram, Israel in Egypt, and Ephraim in Trouble</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:12</span> Jacob fled to the country of Aram,</p>
<p class="poetry">then Israel worked to acquire a wife;</p>
<p class="poetry">he tended sheep to pay for her.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> brought Israel out of Egypt by a prophet,</p>
<p class="poetry">and due to a prophet Israel was preserved alive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:14</span> But Ephraim bitterly provoked him to anger;</p>
<p class="poetry">so he will hold him accountable for the blood he has shed, </p>
<p class="poetry">his Lord will repay him for the contempt he has shown. </p>

</body>
</html>