<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 76</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 76</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, to be accompanied by stringed instruments; a psalm of Asaph, a song.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:1</span> God has revealed himself in Judah; </p>
<p class="poetry">in Israel his reputation is great. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:2</span> He lives in Salem; </p>
<p class="poetry">he dwells in Zion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:3</span> There he shattered the arrows, </p>
<p class="poetry">the shield, the sword, and the rest of the weapons of war. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:4</span> You shine brightly and reveal your majesty,</p>
<p class="poetry">as you descend from the hills where you killed your prey. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:5</span> The bravehearted were plundered; </p>
<p class="poetry">they “fell asleep.” </p>
<p class="poetry">All the warriors were helpless. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:6</span> At the sound of your battle cry, O God of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">both rider and horse “fell asleep.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:7</span> You are awesome! Yes, you!</p>
<p class="poetry">Who can withstand your intense anger? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:8</span> From heaven you announced what their punishment would be. </p>
<p class="poetry">The earth was afraid and silent </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:9</span> when God arose to execute judgment,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to deliver all the oppressed of the earth. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:10</span> Certainly your angry judgment upon men will bring you praise; </p>
<p class="poetry">you reveal your anger in full measure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:11</span> Make vows to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God and repay them.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let all those who surround him bring tribute to the awesome one.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">76:12</span> He humbles princes; </p>
<p class="poetry">the kings of the earth regard him as awesome. </p>

</body>
</html>