<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Sacrificial Rulings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">15:2</span> “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you enter the land where you are to live, which I am giving you, <span class="verse">15:3</span> and you make an offering by fire to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from the herd or from the flock (whether a burnt offering or a sacrifice for discharging a vow or as a freewill offering or in your solemn feasts) to create a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, <span class="verse">15:4</span> then the one who presents his offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> must bring a grain offering of one-tenth of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with one-fourth of a hin of olive oil. <span class="verse">15:5</span> You must also prepare one-fourth of a hin of wine for a drink offering with the burnt offering or the sacrifice for each lamb. <span class="verse">15:6</span> Or for a ram, you must prepare as a grain offering two-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with one-third of a hin of olive oil, <span class="verse">15:7</span> and for a drink offering you must offer one-third of a hin of wine as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">15:8</span> And when you prepare a young bull as a burnt offering or a sacrifice for discharging a vow or as a peace offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, <span class="verse">15:9</span> then a grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with half a hin of olive oil must be presented with the young bull, <span class="verse">15:10</span> and you must present as the drink offering half a hin of wine with the fire offering as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">15:11</span> This is what is to be done for each ox, or each ram, or each of the male lambs or the goats. <span class="verse">15:12</span> You must do so for each one according to the number that you prepare. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:13</span> “‘Every native-born person must do these things in this way to present an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">15:14</span> If a resident foreigner is living with you—or whoever is among you in future generations —and prepares an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, he must do it the same way you are to do it. <span class="verse">15:15</span> One statute must apply to you who belong to the congregation and to the resident foreigner who is living among you, as a permanent statute for your future generations. You and the resident foreigner will be alike before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">15:16</span> One law and one custom must apply to you and to the resident foreigner who lives alongside you.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rules for Firstfruits</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:17</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">15:18</span> “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you enter the land to which I am bringing you <span class="verse">15:19</span> and you eat some of the food of the land, you must offer up a raised offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">15:20</span> You must offer up a cake of the first of your finely ground flour as a raised offering; as you offer the raised offering of the threshing floor, so you must offer it up. <span class="verse">15:21</span> You must give to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> some of the first of your finely ground flour as a raised offering in your future generations. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rules for Unintentional Offenses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:22</span>  “‘If you sin unintentionally and do not observe all these commandments that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken to Moses— <span class="verse">15:23</span> all that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has commanded you by the authority of Moses, from the day that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded Moses and continuing through your future generations— <span class="verse">15:24</span> then if anything is done unintentionally without the knowledge of the community, the whole community must prepare one young bull for a burnt offering—for a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—along with its grain offering and its customary drink offering, and one male goat for a purification offering. <span class="verse">15:25</span> And the priest is to make atonement for the whole community of the Israelites, and they will be forgiven, because it was unintentional and they have brought their offering, an offering made by fire to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and their purification offering before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for their unintentional offense. <span class="verse">15:26</span> And the whole community of the Israelites and the resident foreigner who lives among them will be forgiven, since all the people were involved in the unintentional offense.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:27</span> “‘If any person sins unintentionally, then he must bring a yearling female goat for a purification offering. <span class="verse">15:28</span> And the priest must make atonement for the person who sins unintentionally—when he sins unintentionally before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—to make atonement for him, and he will be forgiven. <span class="verse">15:29</span> You must have one law for the person who sins unintentionally, both for the native-born among the Israelites and for the resident foreigner who lives among them.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Deliberate Sin</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:30</span> “‘But the person who acts defiantly, whether native-born or a resident foreigner, insults the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. That person must be cut off from among his people. <span class="verse">15:31</span> Because he has despised the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message and has broken his commandment, that person must be completely cut off. His iniquity will be on him.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:32</span> When the Israelites were in the wilderness they found a man gathering wood on the Sabbath day. <span class="verse">15:33</span> Those who found him gathering wood brought him to Moses and Aaron and to the whole community. <span class="verse">15:34</span> They put him in custody, because there was no clear instruction about what should be done to him. <span class="verse">15:35</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, “The man must surely be put to death; the whole community must stone him with stones outside the camp.” <span class="verse">15:36</span> So the whole community took him outside the camp and stoned him to death, just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded Moses. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rules for Tassels</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:37</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">15:38</span> “Speak to the Israelites and tell them to make tassels for themselves on the corners of their garments throughout their generations, and put a blue thread on the tassel of the corners. <span class="verse">15:39</span> You must have this tassel so that you may look at it and remember all the commandments of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and obey them and so that you do not follow after your own heart and your own eyes that lead you to unfaithfulness. <span class="verse">15:40</span> Thus you will remember and obey all my commandments and be holy to your God. <span class="verse">15:41</span> I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God.” </p>

</body>
</html>