<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 10</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:1</span> Why, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do you stand far off?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you pay no attention during times of trouble? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:2</span> The wicked arrogantly chase the oppressed; </p>
<p class="poetry">the oppressed are trapped by the schemes the wicked have dreamed up. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:3</span> Yes, the wicked man boasts because he gets what he wants; </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who robs others curses and rejects the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:4</span> The wicked man is so arrogant he always thinks,</p>
<p class="poetry">“God won’t hold me accountable; he doesn’t care.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:5</span> He is secure at all times. </p>
<p class="poetry">He has no regard for your commands; </p>
<p class="poetry">he disdains all his enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:6</span> He says to himself, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will never be shaken,</p>
<p class="poetry">because I experience no calamity.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:7</span> His mouth is full of curses and deceptive, harmful words; </p>
<p class="poetry">his tongue injures and destroys. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:8</span> He waits in ambush near the villages; </p>
<p class="poetry">in hidden places he kills the innocent.</p>
<p class="poetry">His eyes look for some unfortunate victim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:9</span> He lies in ambush in a hidden place, like a lion in a thicket. </p>
<p class="poetry">He lies in ambush, waiting to catch the oppressed;</p>
<p class="poetry">he catches the oppressed by pulling in his net. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:10</span> His victims are crushed and beaten down;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are trapped in his sturdy nets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:11</span> He says to himself, </p>
<p class="poetry">“God overlooks it;</p>
<p class="poetry">he does not pay attention;</p>
<p class="poetry">he never notices.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:12</span> Rise up, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="poetry">O God, strike him down. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not forget the oppressed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:13</span> Why does the wicked man reject God? </p>
<p class="poetry">He says to himself, “You will not hold me accountable.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:14</span> You have taken notice, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you always see one who inflicts pain and suffering. </p>
<p class="poetry">The unfortunate victim entrusts his cause to you; </p>
<p class="poetry">you deliver the fatherless. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:15</span> Break the arm of the wicked and evil man.</p>
<p class="poetry">Hold him accountable for his wicked deeds, </p>
<p class="poetry">which he thought you would not discover. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:16</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rules forever! </p>
<p class="poetry">The nations are driven out of his land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:17</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you have heard the request of the oppressed;</p>
<p class="poetry">you make them feel secure because you listen to their prayer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:18</span> You defend the fatherless and oppressed, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that mere mortals may no longer terrorize them. </p>

</body>
</html>