<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 31</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 31</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Egypt Will Disappoint</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:1</span> Those who go down to Egypt for help are as good as dead; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who rely on war horses,</p>
<p class="poetry">and trust in Egypt’s many chariots </p>
<p class="poetry">and in their many, many horsemen. </p>
<p class="poetry">But they do not rely on the Holy One of Israel </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not seek help from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:2</span> Yet he too is wise and he will bring disaster;</p>
<p class="poetry">he does not retract his decree. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will attack the wicked nation, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the nation that helps those who commit sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:3</span> The Egyptians are mere humans, not God;</p>
<p class="poetry">their horses are made of flesh, not spirit.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will strike with his hand;</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who helps will stumble</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one being helped will fall.</p>
<p class="poetry">Together they will perish. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Defend Zion</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:4</span> Indeed, this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said to me:</p>
<p class="poetry">“The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be like a growling lion,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a young lion growling over its prey. </p>
<p class="poetry">Though a whole group of shepherds gathers against it,</p>
<p class="poetry">it is not afraid of their shouts</p>
<p class="poetry">or intimidated by their yelling. </p>
<p class="poetry">In this same way the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies will descend</p>
<p class="poetry">to do battle on Mount Zion and on its hill. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:5</span> Just as birds hover over a nest, </p>
<p class="poetry">so the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies will protect Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will protect and deliver it;</p>
<p class="poetry">as he passes over he will rescue it.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">31:6</span> You Israelites! Return to the one you have so blatantly rebelled against! <span class="verse">31:7</span> For at that time every one will get rid of the silver and gold idols your hands sinfully made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:8</span> “Assyria will fall by a sword, but not one human-made; </p>
<p class="poetry">a sword not made by humankind will destroy them. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will run away from this sword </p>
<p class="poetry">and their young men will be forced to do hard labor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:9</span> They will surrender their stronghold because of fear; </p>
<p class="poetry">their officers will be afraid of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s battle flag.” </p>
<p class="poetry">This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says—</p>
<p class="poetry">the one whose fire is in Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">whose firepot is in Jerusalem. </p>

</body>
</html>