<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:1</span> When you sit down to eat with a ruler,</p>
<p class="poetry">consider carefully what is before you,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:2</span> and put a knife to your throat </p>
<p class="poetry">if you possess a large appetite. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:3</span> Do not crave that ruler’s delicacies,</p>
<p class="poetry">for that food is deceptive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:4</span> Do not wear yourself out to become rich;</p>
<p class="poetry">be wise enough to restrain yourself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:5</span> When you gaze upon riches, they are gone,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they surely make wings for themselves,</p>
<p class="poetry">and fly off into the sky like an eagle! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:6</span> Do not eat the food of a stingy person, </p>
<p class="poetry">do not crave his delicacies; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:7</span> for he is like someone who has calculated the cost in his mind. </p>
<p class="poetry">“Eat and drink,” he says to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">but his heart is not with you;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:8</span> you will vomit up the little bit you have eaten,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will have wasted your pleasant words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:9</span> Do not speak in the ears of a fool, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he will despise the wisdom of your words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:10</span> Do not move an ancient boundary stone,</p>
<p class="poetry">or take over the fields of the fatherless, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:11</span> for their Protector is strong;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will plead their case against you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:12</span> Apply your heart to instruction</p>
<p class="poetry">and your ears to the words of knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:13</span> Do not withhold discipline from a child;</p>
<p class="poetry">even if you strike him with the rod, he will not die. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:14</span> If you strike him with the rod,</p>
<p class="poetry">you will deliver him from death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:15</span> My child, if your heart is wise,</p>
<p class="poetry">then my heart also will be glad; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:16</span> my soul will rejoice</p>
<p class="poetry">when your lips speak what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:17</span> Do not let your heart envy sinners,</p>
<p class="poetry">but rather be zealous in fearing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> all the time. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:18</span> For surely there is a future, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your hope will not be cut off. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:19</span> Listen, my child, and be wise,</p>
<p class="poetry">and guide your heart on the right way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:20</span> Do not spend time among drunkards, </p>
<p class="poetry">among those who eat too much meat, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:21</span> because drunkards and gluttons become impoverished,</p>
<p class="poetry">and drowsiness clothes them with rags. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:22</span> Listen to your father who gave you life,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not despise your mother when she is old. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:23</span> Acquire truth and do not sell it—</p>
<p class="poetry">wisdom, and discipline, and understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:24</span> The father of a righteous person will rejoice greatly; </p>
<p class="poetry">whoever fathers a wise child will have joy in him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:25</span> May your father and your mother have joy;</p>
<p class="poetry">may she who bore you rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:26</span> Give me your heart, my son, </p>
<p class="poetry">and let your eyes observe my ways; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:27</span> for a prostitute is like a deep pit;</p>
<p class="poetry">a harlot is like a narrow well. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:28</span> Indeed, she lies in wait like a robber, </p>
<p class="poetry">and increases the unfaithful among men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:29</span> Who has woe? Who has sorrow?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who has contentions? Who has complaints?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who has wounds without cause? Who has dullness of the eyes? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:30</span> Those who linger over wine,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who go looking for mixed wine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:31</span> Do not look on the wine when it is red,</p>
<p class="poetry">when it sparkles in the cup,</p>
<p class="poetry">when it goes down smoothly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:32</span> Afterward it bites like a snake,</p>
<p class="poetry">and stings like a viper. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:33</span> Your eyes will see strange things, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your mind will speak perverse things. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:34</span> And you will be like one who lies down in the midst of the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">and like one who lies down on the top of the rigging. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:35</span> You will say, “They have struck me, but I am not harmed!</p>
<p class="poetry">They beat me, but I did not know it! </p>
<p class="poetry">When will I awake? I will look for another drink.” </p>

</body>
</html>