<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Futility of Self-Indulgent Pleasure</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> I thought to myself, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Come now, I will try self-indulgent pleasure to see if it is worthwhile.” </p>
<p class="poetry">But I found that it also is futile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> I said of partying, “It is folly,”</p>
<p class="poetry">and of self-indulgent pleasure, “It accomplishes nothing!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> I thought deeply about the effects of indulging myself with wine</p>
<p class="poetry">(all the while my mind was guiding me with wisdom) </p>
<p class="poetry">and the effects of behaving foolishly, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that I might discover what is profitable </p>
<p class="poetry">for people to do on earth during the few days of their lives. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Futility of Materialism</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> I increased my possessions: </p>
<p class="poetry">I built houses for myself; </p>
<p class="poetry">I planted vineyards for myself.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> I designed royal gardens and parks for myself,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I planted all kinds of fruit trees in them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> I constructed pools of water for myself,</p>
<p class="poetry">to irrigate my grove of flourishing trees. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> I purchased male and female slaves,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I owned slaves who were born in my house; </p>
<p class="poetry">I also possessed more livestock—both herds and flocks—</p>
<p class="poetry">than any of my predecessors in Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> I also amassed silver and gold for myself,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as valuable treasures taken from kingdoms and provinces. </p>
<p class="poetry">I acquired male singers and female singers for myself,</p>
<p class="poetry">and what gives a man sensual delight —a harem of beautiful concubines. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> So I was far wealthier than all my predecessors in Jerusalem,</p>
<p class="poetry">yet I maintained my objectivity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> I did not restrain myself from getting whatever I wanted; </p>
<p class="poetry">I did not deny myself anything that would bring me pleasure. </p>
<p class="poetry">So all my accomplishments gave me joy; </p>
<p class="poetry">this was my reward for all my effort. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Yet when I reflected on everything I had accomplished </p>
<p class="poetry">and on all the effort that I had expended to accomplish it, </p>
<p class="poetry">I concluded: “All these achievements and possessions are ultimately profitless —</p>
<p class="poetry">like chasing the wind!</p>
<p class="poetry">There is nothing gained from them on earth.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom is Better than Folly</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> Next, I decided to consider wisdom, as well as foolish behavior and ideas. </p>
<p class="poetry">For what more can the king’s successor do than what the king has already done? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> I realized that wisdom is preferable to folly, </p>
<p class="poetry">just as light is preferable to darkness: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> The wise man can see where he is going, but the fool walks in darkness.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yet I also realized that the same fate happens to them both. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> So I thought to myself, “The fate of the fool will happen even to me! </p>
<p class="poetry">Then what did I gain by becoming so excessively wise?” </p>
<p class="poetry">So I lamented to myself, </p>
<p class="poetry">“The benefits of wisdom are ultimately meaningless!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> For the wise man, like the fool, will not be remembered for very long, </p>
<p class="poetry">because in the days to come, both will already have been forgotten. </p>
<p class="poetry">Alas, the wise man dies—just like the fool! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:17</span> So I loathed life because what </p>
<p class="poetry">happens on earth seems awful to me;</p>
<p class="poetry">for all the benefits of wisdom are futile—like chasing the wind. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Futility of Being a Workaholic</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:18</span> So I loathed all the fruit of my effort, </p>
<p class="poetry">for which I worked so hard on earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">because I must leave it behind in the hands of my successor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:19</span> Who knows if he will be a wise man or a fool?</p>
<p class="poetry">Yet he will be master over all the fruit of my labor </p>
<p class="poetry">for which I worked so wisely on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">This also is futile! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:20</span> So I began to despair about all the fruit of my labor </p>
<p class="poetry">for which I worked so hard on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:21</span> For a man may do his work with wisdom, knowledge, and skill;</p>
<p class="poetry">however, he must hand over the fruit of his labor as an inheritance </p>
<p class="poetry">to someone else who did not work for it.</p>
<p class="poetry">This also is futile, and an awful injustice! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Painful Days and Restless Nights</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:22</span> What does a man acquire from all his labor</p>
<p class="poetry">and from the anxiety that accompanies his toil on earth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:23</span> For all day long his work produces pain and frustration, </p>
<p class="poetry">and even at night his mind cannot relax. </p>
<p class="poetry">This also is futile! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Enjoy Work and its Benefits</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:24</span> There is nothing better for people than to eat and drink,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to find enjoyment in their work.</p>
<p class="poetry">I also perceived that this ability to find enjoyment comes from God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:25</span> For no one can eat and drink </p>
<p class="poetry">or experience joy apart from him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:26</span> For to the one who pleases him, God gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy,</p>
<p class="poetry">but to the sinner, he gives the task of amassing wealth —</p>
<p class="poetry">only to give it to the one who pleases God.</p>
<p class="poetry">This task of the wicked is futile—like chasing the wind! </p>

</body>
</html>