<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Joash’s Reign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:1</span> Joash was seven years old when he began to reign. He reigned for forty years in Jerusalem. His mother was Zibiah, who was from Beer Sheba. <span class="verse">24:2</span> Joash did what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> approved throughout the lifetime of Jehoiada the priest. <span class="verse">24:3</span> Jehoiada chose two wives for him who gave him sons and daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:4</span> Later, Joash was determined to repair the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. <span class="verse">24:5</span> He assembled the priests and Levites and ordered them, “Go out to the cities of Judah and collect the annual quota of silver from all Israel for repairs on the temple of your God. Be quick about it!” But the Levites delayed. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:6</span> So the king summoned Jehoiada the chief priest, and said to him, “Why have you not made the Levites collect from Judah and Jerusalem the tax authorized by Moses the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant and by the assembly of Israel at the tent containing the tablets of the law?” <span class="verse">24:7</span> (Wicked Athaliah and her sons had broken into God’s temple and used all the holy items of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple in their worship of the Baals.) <span class="verse">24:8</span> The king ordered a chest to be made and placed outside the gate of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. <span class="verse">24:9</span> An edict was sent throughout Judah and Jerusalem requiring the people to bring to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> the tax that Moses, God’s servant, imposed on Israel in the wilderness. <span class="verse">24:10</span> All the officials and all the people gladly brought their silver and threw it into the chest until it was full. <span class="verse">24:11</span> Whenever the Levites brought the chest to the royal accountant and they saw there was a lot of silver, the royal scribe and the accountant of the high priest emptied the chest and then took it back to its place. They went through this routine every day and collected a large amount of silver. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:12</span> The king and Jehoiada gave it to the construction foremen assigned to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. They hired carpenters and craftsmen to repair the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple, as well as those skilled in working with iron and bronze to restore the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. <span class="verse">24:13</span> They worked hard and made the repairs. They followed the measurements specified for God’s temple and restored it. <span class="verse">24:14</span> When they were finished, they brought the rest of the silver to the king and Jehoiada. They used it to make items for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple, including items used in the temple service and for burnt sacrifices, pans, and various other gold and silver items. Throughout Jehoiada’s lifetime, burnt sacrifices were offered regularly in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:15</span> Jehoiada grew old and died at the age of 130. <span class="verse">24:16</span> He was buried in the City of David with the kings, because he had accomplished good in Israel and for God and his temple. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:17</span> After Jehoiada died, the officials of Judah visited the king and declared their loyalty to him. The king listened to their advice. <span class="verse">24:18</span> They abandoned the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors and worshiped the Asherah poles and idols. Because of this sinful activity, God was angry with Judah and Jerusalem. <span class="verse">24:19</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> sent prophets among them to lead them back to him. They warned the people, but they would not pay attention. <span class="verse">24:20</span> God’s Spirit energized Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest. He stood up before the people and said to them, “This is what God says: ‘Why are you violating the commands of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>? You will not be prosperous. Because you have rejected the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, he has rejected you!’” <span class="verse">24:21</span> They plotted against him and by royal decree stoned him to death in the courtyard of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. <span class="verse">24:22</span> King Joash disregarded the loyalty Zechariah’s father Jehoiada had shown him and killed Jehoiada’s son. As Zechariah was dying, he said, “May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> take notice and seek vengeance!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:23</span> At the beginning of the year the Syrian army attacked Joash and invaded Judah and Jerusalem. They wiped out all the leaders of the people and sent all the plunder they gathered to the king of Damascus. <span class="verse">24:24</span> Even though the invading Syrian army was relatively weak, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> handed over to them Judah’s very large army, for the people of Judah had abandoned the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors. The Syrians gave Joash what he deserved. <span class="verse">24:25</span> When they withdrew, they left Joash badly wounded. His servants plotted against him because of what he had done to the son of Jehoiada the priest. They murdered him on his bed. Thus he died and was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings. <span class="verse">24:26</span> The conspirators were Zabad son of Shimeath (an Ammonite woman) and Jehozabad son of Shimrith (a Moabite woman).</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:27</span> The list of Joash’s sons, the many prophetic oracles about him, and the account of his building project on God’s temple are included in the record of the Scroll of the Kings. His son Amaziah replaced him as king.</p>

</body>
</html>