<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 26</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 26</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:1</span> Like snow in summer or rain in harvest,</p>
<p class="poetry">so honor is not fitting for a fool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:2</span> Like a fluttering bird or like a flying swallow,</p>
<p class="poetry">so a curse without cause does not come to rest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:3</span> A whip for the horse and a bridle for the donkey,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a rod for the backs of fools! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:4</span> Do not answer a fool according to his folly, </p>
<p class="poetry">lest you yourself also be like him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:5</span> Answer a fool according to his folly, </p>
<p class="poetry">lest he be wise in his own opinion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:6</span> Like cutting off the feet or drinking violence, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is sending a message by the hand of a fool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:7</span> Like legs dangle uselessly from the lame,</p>
<p class="poetry">so a proverb dangles in the mouth of fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:8</span> Like tying a stone in a sling, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is giving honor to a fool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:9</span> Like a thorn has gone up into the hand of a drunkard,</p>
<p class="poetry">so a proverb has gone up into the mouth of a fool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:10</span> Like an archer who wounds at random, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is the one who hires a fool or hires any passerby. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:11</span> Like a dog that returns to its vomit, </p>
<p class="poetry">so a fool repeats his folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:12</span> You have seen a man wise in his own opinion — </p>
<p class="poetry">there is more hope for a fool than for him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:13</span> The sluggard has said, “There is a lion in the road!</p>
<p class="poetry">A lion in the streets!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:14</span> Like a door that turns on its hinges, </p>
<p class="poetry">so a sluggard turns on his bed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:15</span> The sluggard has plunged his hand in the dish;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is too lazy to bring it back to his mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:16</span> The sluggard is wiser in his own opinion </p>
<p class="poetry">than seven people who respond with good sense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:17</span> Like one who grabs a wild dog by the ears, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is the person passing by who becomes furious over a quarrel not his own.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:18</span> Like a madman who shoots</p>
<p class="poetry">firebrands and deadly arrows, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:19</span> so is a person who has deceived his neighbor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and said, “Was I not only joking?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:20</span> Where there is no wood, a fire goes out,</p>
<p class="poetry">and where there is no gossip, contention ceases. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:21</span> Like charcoal is to burning coals, and wood to fire,</p>
<p class="poetry">so is a contentious person to kindle strife. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:22</span> The words of a gossip are like choice morsels;</p>
<p class="poetry">and they have gone down into a person’s innermost being. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:23</span> Like a coating of glaze over earthenware</p>
<p class="poetry">are fervent lips with an evil heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:24</span> The one who hates others disguises it with his lips,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he stores up deceit within him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:25</span> When he speaks graciously, do not believe him, </p>
<p class="poetry">for there are seven abominations within him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:26</span> Though his hatred may be concealed by deceit,</p>
<p class="poetry">his evil will be uncovered in the assembly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:27</span> The one who digs a pit will fall into it;</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who rolls a stone—it will come back on him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:28</span> A lying tongue hates those crushed by it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a flattering mouth works ruin. </p>

</body>
</html>