<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Acts 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Acts<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter and John Heal a Lame Man at the Temple</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Now Peter and John were going up to the temple at the time for prayer, at three o’clock in the afternoon. <span class="verse">3:2</span> And a man lame from birth was being carried up, who was placed at the temple gate called “the Beautiful Gate” every day so he could beg for money from those going into the temple courts. <span class="verse">3:3</span> When he saw Peter and John about to go into the temple courts, he asked them for money. <span class="verse">3:4</span> Peter looked directly at him (as did John) and said, “Look at us!” <span class="verse">3:5</span> So the lame man paid attention to them, expecting to receive something from them. <span class="verse">3:6</span> But Peter said, “I have no silver or gold, but what I do have I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, stand up and walk!” <span class="verse">3:7</span> Then Peter took hold of him by the right hand and raised him up, and at once the man’s feet and ankles were made strong. <span class="verse">3:8</span> He jumped up, stood and began walking around, and he entered the temple courts with them, walking and leaping and praising God. <span class="verse">3:9</span> All the people saw him walking and praising God, <span class="verse">3:10</span> and they recognized him as the man who used to sit and ask for donations at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were filled with astonishment and amazement at what had happened to him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter Addresses the Crowd</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:11</span> While the man was hanging on to Peter and John, all the people, completely astounded, ran together to them in the covered walkway called Solomon’s Portico. <span class="verse">3:12</span> When Peter saw this, he declared to the people, “Men of Israel, why are you amazed at this? Why do you stare at us as if we had made this man walk by our own power or piety? <span class="verse">3:13</span> The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our forefathers, has glorified his servant Jesus, whom you handed over and rejected in the presence of Pilate after he had decided to release him. <span class="verse">3:14</span> But you rejected the Holy and Righteous One and asked that a man who was a murderer be released to you. <span class="verse">3:15</span> You killed the Originator of life, whom God raised from the dead. To this fact we are witnesses! <span class="verse">3:16</span> And on the basis of faith in Jesus’ name, his very name has made this man—whom you see and know—strong. The faith that is through Jesus has given him this complete health in the presence of you all. <span class="verse">3:17</span> And now, brothers, I know you acted in ignorance, as your rulers did too. <span class="verse">3:18</span> But the things God foretold long ago through all the prophets—that his Christ would suffer—he has fulfilled in this way. <span class="verse">3:19</span> Therefore repent and turn back so that your sins may be wiped out, <span class="verse">3:20</span> so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and so that he may send the Messiah appointed for you—that is, Jesus. <span class="verse">3:21</span> This one heaven must receive until the time all things are restored, which God declared from times long ago through his holy prophets. <span class="verse">3:22</span> Moses said, ‘<i><b>The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers</b>. <b>You must obey</b></i> <b><i>him in everything he tells you</i></b>. <span class="verse">3:23</span> <b><i>Every</i></b> <b><i>person</i></b> <b><i>who</i></b> <b><i>does not obey that prophet will be destroyed and thus removed</i></b> <b><i>from the people</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">3:24</span> And all the prophets, from Samuel and those who followed him, have spoken about and announced these days. <span class="verse">3:25</span> You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your ancestors, saying to Abraham, ‘<b><i>And in your descendants</i></b> <b><i>all</i></b> <b><i>the nations</i></b> <b><i>of the earth will be blessed</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">3:26</span> God raised up his servant and sent him first to you, to bless you by turning each one of you from your iniquities.” </p>

</body>
</html>