<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Everyone Will Die</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:1</span> So I reflected on all this, attempting to clear it all up.</p>
<p class="poetry">I concluded that the righteous and the wise, as well as their works, are in the hand of God;</p>
<p class="poetry">whether a person will be loved or hated —</p>
<p class="poetry">no one knows what lies ahead. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:2</span> Everyone shares the same fate —</p>
<p class="poetry">the righteous and the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">the good and the bad, </p>
<p class="poetry">the ceremonially clean and unclean,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who offer sacrifices and those who do not.</p>
<p class="poetry">What happens to the good person, also happens to the sinner; </p>
<p class="poetry">what happens to those who make vows, also happens to those who are afraid to make vows.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:3</span> This is the unfortunate fact about everything that happens on earth: </p>
<p class="poetry">the same fate awaits everyone.</p>
<p class="poetry">In addition to this, the hearts of all people are full of evil,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there is folly in their hearts during their lives—then they die. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Better to Be Poor but Alive than Rich but Dead</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:4</span> But whoever is among the living has hope;</p>
<p class="poetry">a live dog is better than a dead lion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:5</span> For the living know that they will die, but the dead do not know anything;</p>
<p class="poetry">they have no further reward—and even the memory of them disappears. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:6</span> What they loved, as well as what they hated and envied, perished long ago,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they no longer have a part in anything that happens on earth. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Life is Brief, so Cherish its Joys</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:7</span> Go, eat your food with joy,</p>
<p class="poetry">and drink your wine with a happy heart,</p>
<p class="poetry">because God has already approved your works. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:8</span> Let your clothes always be white,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not spare precious ointment on your head. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:9</span> Enjoy life with your beloved wife during all the days of your fleeting life</p>
<p class="poetry">that God has given you on earth during all your fleeting days; </p>
<p class="poetry">for that is your reward in life and in your burdensome work on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:10</span> Whatever you find to do with your hands, </p>
<p class="poetry">do it with all your might,</p>
<p class="poetry">because there is neither work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the grave, </p>
<p class="poetry">the place where you will eventually go. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom Cannot Protect against Seemingly Chance Events</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:11</span> Again, I observed this on the earth: </p>
<p class="poetry">the race is not always won by the swiftest,</p>
<p class="poetry">the battle is not always won by the strongest;</p>
<p class="poetry">prosperity does not always belong to those who are the wisest,</p>
<p class="poetry">wealth does not always belong to those who are the most discerning,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor does success always come to those with the most knowledge—</p>
<p class="poetry">for time and chance may overcome them all. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:12</span> Surely, no one knows his appointed time. </p>
<p class="poetry">Like fish that are caught in a deadly net, and like birds that are caught in a snare—</p>
<p class="poetry">just like them, all people are ensnared at an unfortunate time that falls upon them suddenly. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Most People Are Not Receptive to Wise Counsel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:13</span> This is what I also observed about wisdom on earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it is a great burden to me:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:14</span> There was once a small city with a few men in it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a mighty king attacked it, besieging it and building strong siege works against it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:15</span> However, a poor but wise man lived in the city, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he could have delivered the city by his wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">but no one listened to that poor man. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:16</span> So I concluded that wisdom is better than might, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a poor man’s wisdom is despised; no one ever listens to his advice. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom versus Fools, Sin, and Folly</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:17</span> The words of the wise are heard in quiet,</p>
<p class="poetry">more than the shouting of a ruler is heard among fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:18</span> Wisdom is better than weapons of war,</p>
<p class="poetry">but one sinner can destroy much that is good. </p>

</body>
</html>