<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Vision Five: The Menorah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> The angelic messenger who had been speaking with me then returned and woke me, as a person is wakened from sleep. <span class="verse">4:2</span> He asked me, “What do you see?” I replied, “I see a menorah of pure gold with a receptacle at the top. There are seven lamps at the top, with seven pipes going to the lamps. <span class="verse">4:3</span> There are also two olive trees beside it, one on the right of the receptacle and the other on the left.” <span class="verse">4:4</span> Then I asked the messenger who spoke with me, “What are these, sir?” <span class="verse">4:5</span> He replied, “Don’t you know what these are?” So I responded, “No, sir.” <span class="verse">4:6</span> Therefore he told me, “This is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message to Zerubbabel: ‘Not by strength and not by power, but by my Spirit,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Oracle of Response</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:7</span> “What are you, you great mountain? Because of Zerubbabel you will become a level plain! And he will bring forth the temple capstone with shoutings of ‘Grace! Grace!’ because of this.” <span class="verse">4:8</span> Moreover, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to me as follows: <span class="verse">4:9</span> “The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundations of this temple, and his hands will complete it. Then you will know that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has sent me to you. <span class="verse">4:10</span> For who dares make light of small beginnings? These seven eyes will joyfully look on the tin tablet in Zerubbabel’s hand. These are the eyes of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, which constantly range across the whole earth.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Next I asked the messenger, “What are these two olive trees on the right and the left of the menorah?” <span class="verse">4:12</span> Before he could reply I asked again, “What are these two extensions of the olive trees, which are emptying out the golden oil through the two golden pipes?” <span class="verse">4:13</span> He replied, “Don’t you know what these are?” And I said, “No, sir.” <span class="verse">4:14</span> So he said, “These are the two anointed ones who stand by the Lord of the whole earth.” </p>

</body>
</html>