<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 91</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 91</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:1</span> As for you, the one who lives in the shelter of the Most High, </p>
<p class="poetry">and resides in the protective shadow of the Sovereign One —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:2</span> I say this about the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my shelter and my stronghold,</p>
<p class="poetry">my God in whom I trust—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:3</span> he will certainly rescue you from the snare of the hunter </p>
<p class="poetry">and from the destructive plague. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:4</span> He will shelter you with his wings; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will find safety under his wings.</p>
<p class="poetry">His faithfulness is like a shield or a protective wall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:5</span> You need not fear the terrors of the night, </p>
<p class="poetry">the arrow that flies by day, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:6</span> the plague that stalks in the darkness,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the disease that ravages at noon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:7</span> Though a thousand may fall beside you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a multitude on your right side,</p>
<p class="poetry">it will not reach you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:8</span> Certainly you will see it with your very own eyes—</p>
<p class="poetry">you will see the wicked paid back. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:9</span> For you have taken refuge in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">my shelter, the Most High.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:10</span> No harm will overtake you;</p>
<p class="poetry">no illness will come near your home. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:11</span> For he will order his angels </p>
<p class="poetry">to protect you in all you do. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:12</span> They will lift you up in their hands,</p>
<p class="poetry">so you will not slip and fall on a stone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:13</span> You will subdue a lion and a snake; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will trample underfoot a young lion and a serpent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Because he is devoted to me, I will deliver him;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will protect him because he is loyal to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:15</span> When he calls out to me, I will answer him.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will be with him when he is in trouble;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will rescue him and bring him honor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">91:16</span> I will satisfy him with long life, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will let him see my salvation.” </p>

</body>
</html>