<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Cutting of the Covenant</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> After these things the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to Abram in a vision: “Fear not, Abram! I am your shield and the one who will reward you in great abundance.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:2</span> But Abram said, “O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, what will you give me since I continue to be childless, and my heir is Eliezer of Damascus?” <span class="verse">15:3</span> Abram added, “Since you have not given me a descendant, then look, one born in my house will be my heir!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:4</span> But look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to him: “This man will not be your heir, but instead a son who comes from your own body will be your heir.” <span class="verse">15:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> took him outside and said, “Gaze into the sky and count the stars—if you are able to count them!” Then he said to him, “So will your descendants be.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:6</span> Abram believed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> credited it as righteousness to him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to him, “I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who brought you out from Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to possess.” <span class="verse">15:8</span> But Abram said, “O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, by what can I know that I am to possess it?”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to him, “Take for me a heifer, a goat, and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon.” <span class="verse">15:10</span> So Abram took all these for him and then cut them in two and placed each half opposite the other, but he did not cut the birds in half. <span class="verse">15:11</span> When birds of prey came down on the carcasses, Abram drove them away.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:12</span> When the sun went down, Abram fell sound asleep, and great terror overwhelmed him. <span class="verse">15:13</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Abram, “Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a foreign country. They will be enslaved and oppressed for 400 years. <span class="verse">15:14</span> But I will execute judgment on the nation that they will serve. Afterward they will come out with many possessions. <span class="verse">15:15</span> But as for you, you will go to your ancestors in peace and be buried at a good old age. <span class="verse">15:16</span> In the fourth generation your descendants will return here, for the sin of the Amorites has not yet reached its limit.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:17</span> When the sun had gone down and it was dark, a smoking firepot with a flaming torch passed between the animal parts. <span class="verse">15:18</span> That day the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made a covenant with Abram: “To your descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates River— <span class="verse">15:19</span> the land of the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, <span class="verse">15:20</span> Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaites, <span class="verse">15:21</span> Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and Jebusites.” </p>

</body>
</html>