<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Exodus 31</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Exodus<br />Chapter 31</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Willing Artisans</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">31:1</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses, <span class="verse">31:2</span> “See, I have chosen Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, <span class="verse">31:3</span> and I have filled him with the Spirit of God in skill, in understanding, in knowledge, and in all kinds of craftsmanship, <span class="verse">31:4</span> to make artistic designs for work with gold, with silver, and with bronze, <span class="verse">31:5</span> and with cutting and setting stone, and with cutting wood, to work in all kinds of craftsmanship. <span class="verse">31:6</span> Moreover, I have also given him Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, and I have given ability to all the specially skilled, that they may make everything I have commanded you: <span class="verse">31:7</span> the tent of meeting, the ark of the testimony, the atonement lid that is on it, all the furnishings of the tent, <span class="verse">31:8</span> the table with its utensils, the pure lampstand with all its utensils, the altar of incense, <span class="verse">31:9</span> the altar for the burnt offering with all its utensils, the large basin with its base, <span class="verse">31:10</span> the woven garments, the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons, to minister as priests, <span class="verse">31:11</span> the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the Holy Place. They will make all these things just as I have commanded you.”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Sabbath Observance</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">31:12</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, <span class="verse">31:13</span> “Tell the Israelites, ‘Surely you must keep my Sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that you may know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who sanctifies you. <span class="verse">31:14</span> So you must keep the Sabbath, for it is holy for you. Everyone who defiles it must surely be put to death; indeed, if anyone does any work on it, then that person will be cut off from among his people. <span class="verse">31:15</span> Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a Sabbath of complete rest, holy to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; anyone who does work on the Sabbath day must surely be put to death. <span class="verse">31:16</span> The Israelites must keep the Sabbath by observing the Sabbath throughout their generations as a perpetual covenant. <span class="verse">31:17</span> It is a sign between me and the Israelites forever; for in six days the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">31:18</span> He gave Moses two tablets of testimony when he had finished speaking with him on Mount Sinai, tablets of stone written by the finger of God. </p>

</body>
</html>