<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 64</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 64</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:1</span> (63:19b) If only you would tear apart the sky and come down!</p>
<p class="poetry">The mountains would tremble before you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:2</span> (64:1) As when fire ignites dry wood,</p>
<p class="poetry">or fire makes water boil,</p>
<p class="poetry">let your adversaries know who you are, </p>
<p class="poetry">and may the nations shake at your presence! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:3</span> When you performed awesome deeds that took us by surprise, </p>
<p class="poetry">you came down, and the mountains trembled before you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:4</span> Since ancient times no one has heard or perceived, </p>
<p class="poetry">no eye has seen any God besides you,</p>
<p class="poetry">who intervenes for those who wait for him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:5</span> You assist those who delight in doing what is right, </p>
<p class="poetry">who observe your commandments. </p>
<p class="poetry">Look, you were angry because we violated them continually. </p>
<p class="poetry">How then can we be saved? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:6</span> We are all like one who is unclean,</p>
<p class="poetry">all our so-called righteous acts are like a menstrual rag in your sight. </p>
<p class="poetry">We all wither like a leaf;</p>
<p class="poetry">our sins carry us away like the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:7</span> No one invokes your name,</p>
<p class="poetry">or makes an effort to take hold of you. </p>
<p class="poetry">For you have rejected us </p>
<p class="poetry">and handed us over to our own sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:8</span> Yet, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you are our father.</p>
<p class="poetry">We are the clay, and you are our potter;</p>
<p class="poetry">we are all the product of your labor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:9</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do not be too angry!</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not hold our sins against us continually. </p>
<p class="poetry">Take a good look at your people, at all of us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:10</span> Your chosen cities have become a wilderness;</p>
<p class="poetry">Zion has become a wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">Jerusalem, a desolate ruin.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:11</span> Our holy temple, our pride and joy, </p>
<p class="poetry">the place where our ancestors praised you,</p>
<p class="poetry">has been burned with fire;</p>
<p class="poetry">all our prized possessions have been destroyed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">64:12</span> In light of all this, how can you still hold back, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?</p>
<p class="poetry">How can you be silent and continue to humiliate us?</p>

</body>
</html>