<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Judges 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Judges<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Stability Restored</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> After Abimelech’s death, Tola son of Puah, grandson of Dodo, from the tribe of Issachar, rose up to deliver Israel. He lived in Shamir in the Ephraimite hill country. <span class="verse">10:2</span> He led Israel for twenty-three years, then died and was buried in Shamir. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:3</span> Jair the Gileadite rose up after him; he led Israel for twenty-two years. <span class="verse">10:4</span> He had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys and possessed thirty cities. To this day these towns are called Havvoth Jair —they are in the land of Gilead. <span class="verse">10:5</span> Jair died and was buried in Kamon. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Patience Runs Short</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:6</span> The Israelites again did evil in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sight. They worshiped the Baals and the Ashtoreths, as well as the gods of Syria, Sidon, Moab, the Ammonites, and the Philistines. They abandoned the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and did not worship him. <span class="verse">10:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was furious with Israel and turned them over to the Philistines and Ammonites. <span class="verse">10:8</span> They ruthlessly oppressed the Israelites that eighteenth year —that is, all the Israelites living east of the Jordan in Amorite country in Gilead. <span class="verse">10:9</span> The Ammonites crossed the Jordan to fight with Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim. Israel suffered greatly. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:10</span> The Israelites cried out for help to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>: “We have sinned against you. We abandoned our God and worshiped the Baals.” <span class="verse">10:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to the Israelites, “Did I not deliver you from Egypt, the Amorites, the Ammonites, the Philistines, <span class="verse">10:12</span> the Sidonians, Amalek, and Midian when they oppressed you? You cried out for help to me, and I delivered you from their power. <span class="verse">10:13</span> But since you abandoned me and worshiped other gods, I will not deliver you again. <span class="verse">10:14</span> Go and cry for help to the gods you have chosen! Let them deliver you from trouble!” <span class="verse">10:15</span> But the Israelites said to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “We have sinned. You do to us as you see fit, but deliver us today!” <span class="verse">10:16</span> They threw away the foreign gods they owned and worshiped the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Finally the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> grew tired of seeing Israel suffer so much. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Outcast Becomes a General</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:17</span> The Ammonites assembled and camped in Gilead; the Israelites gathered together and camped in Mizpah. <span class="verse">10:18</span> The leaders of Gilead said to one another, “Who is willing to lead the charge against the Ammonites? He will become the leader of all who live in Gilead!” </p>

</body>
</html>