<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Peter 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Peter<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> So, since Christ suffered in the flesh, you also arm yourselves with the same attitude, because the one who has suffered in the flesh has finished with sin, <span class="verse">4:2</span> in that he spends the rest of his time on earth concerned about the will of God and not human desires. <span class="verse">4:3</span> For the time that has passed was sufficient for you to do what the non-Christians desire. You lived then in debauchery, evil desires, drunkenness, carousing, drinking bouts, and wanton idolatries. <span class="verse">4:4</span> So they are astonished when you do not rush with them into the same flood of wickedness, and they vilify you. <span class="verse">4:5</span> They will face a reckoning before Jesus Christ who stands ready to judge the living and the dead. <span class="verse">4:6</span> Now it was for this very purpose that the gospel was preached to those who are now dead, so that though they were judged in the flesh by human standards they may live spiritually by God’s standards. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Service, Suffering, and Judgment</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:7</span> For the culmination of all things is near. So be self-controlled and sober-minded for the sake of prayer. <span class="verse">4:8</span> Above all keep your love for one another fervent, because <i><b>love covers a multitude of sins</b></i>. <span class="verse">4:9</span> Show hospitality to one another without complaining. <span class="verse">4:10</span> Just as each one has received a gift, use it to serve one another as good stewards of the varied grace of God. <span class="verse">4:11</span> Whoever speaks, let it be with God’s words. Whoever serves, do so with the strength that God supplies, so that in everything God will be glorified through Jesus Christ. To him belong the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:12</span> Dear friends, do not be astonished that a trial by fire is occurring among you, as though something strange were happening to you. <span class="verse">4:13</span> But rejoice in the degree that you have shared in the sufferings of Christ, so that when his glory is revealed you may also rejoice and be glad. <span class="verse">4:14</span> If you are insulted for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory, who is <b><i>the Spirit of God</i></b>, <b><i>rests</i></b> on you. <span class="verse">4:15</span> But let none of you suffer as a murderer or thief or criminal or as a troublemaker. <span class="verse">4:16</span> But if you suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but glorify God that you bear such a name. <span class="verse">4:17</span> For it is time for judgment to begin, starting with the house of God. And if it starts with us, what will be the fate of those who are disobedient to the gospel of God? <span class="verse">4:18</span> And <i><b>if</b></i> <i><b>the righteous are barely saved, what will become of</b></i> <b><i>the ungodly and sinners?</i></b> <span class="verse">4:19</span> So then let those who suffer according to the will of God entrust their souls to a faithful Creator as they do good. </p>

</body>
</html>