<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:1</span> “Call now! Is there anyone who will answer you? </p>
<p class="poetry">To which of the holy ones will you turn? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> For wrath kills the foolish person, </p>
<p class="poetry">and anger slays the silly one.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> I myself have seen the fool taking root,</p>
<p class="poetry">but suddenly I cursed his place of residence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> His children are far from safety,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they are crushed at the  place where judgment is rendered, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor is there anyone to deliver them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> The hungry eat up his harvest, </p>
<p class="poetry">and take it even from behind the thorns, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the thirsty pant for their wealth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> For evil does not come up from the dust, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor does trouble spring up from the ground, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> but people are born to trouble,</p>
<p class="poetry">as surely as the sparks fly upward. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessings for the One Who Seeks God </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> “But as for me, I would seek God, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to God I would set forth my case. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> He does great and unsearchable things,</p>
<p class="poetry">marvelous things without number; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> he gives rain on the earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and sends water on the fields; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> he sets the lowly on high,</p>
<p class="poetry">that those who mourn are raised to safety. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> He frustrates the plans of the crafty </p>
<p class="poetry">so that their hands cannot accomplish </p>
<p class="poetry">what they had planned. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> He catches the wise in their own craftiness, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the counsel of the cunning is brought to a quick end. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:14</span> They meet with darkness in the daytime, </p>
<p class="poetry">and grope about in the noontime as if it were night. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> So he saves from the sword that comes from their mouth, </p>
<p class="poetry">even the poor from the hand of the powerful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:16</span> Thus the poor have hope, </p>
<p class="poetry">and iniquity shuts its mouth. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:17</span> “Therefore, blessed is the man whom God corrects, </p>
<p class="poetry">so do not despise the discipline of the Almighty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:18</span> For he wounds, but he also bandages;</p>
<p class="poetry">he strikes, but his hands also heal. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:19</span> He will deliver you from six calamities;</p>
<p class="poetry">yes, in seven no evil will touch you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:20</span> In time of famine he will redeem you from death,</p>
<p class="poetry">and in time of war from the power of the sword. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:21</span> You will be protected from malicious gossip, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will not be afraid of the destruction when it comes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:22</span> You will laugh at destruction and famine </p>
<p class="poetry">and need not be afraid of the beasts of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:23</span> For you will have a pact with the stones of the field,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the wild animals will be at peace with you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:24</span> And you will know that your home will be secure, </p>
<p class="poetry">and when you inspect your domains, </p>
<p class="poetry">you will not be missing anything.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:25</span> You will also know that your children will be numerous,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your descendants like the grass of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:26</span> You will come to your grave in a full age, </p>
<p class="poetry">As stacks of grain are harvested in their season. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:27</span> Look, we have investigated this, so it is true.</p>
<p class="poetry">Hear it, and apply it for your own good.” </p>

</body>
</html>