<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> When all the Amorite kings on the west side of the Jordan and all the Canaanite kings along the seacoast heard how the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had dried up the water of the Jordan before the Israelites while they crossed, they lost their courage and could not even breathe for fear of the Israelites. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A New Generation is Circumcised </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:2</span> At that time the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told Joshua, “Make flint knives and circumcise the Israelites once again.” <span class="verse">5:3</span> So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the Israelites at the Hill of the Foreskins. <span class="verse">5:4</span> This is why Joshua had to circumcise them: All the men old enough to fight when they left Egypt died on the journey through the wilderness after they left Egypt. <span class="verse">5:5</span> Now all the men who left were circumcised, but all the sons born on the journey through the wilderness after they left Egypt were uncircumcised. <span class="verse">5:6</span> Indeed, for forty years the Israelites traveled through the wilderness until all the men old enough to fight when they left Egypt, the ones who had disobeyed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, died off. For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had sworn a solemn oath to them that he would not let them see the land he had sworn by oath to their ancestors to give them, a land rich in milk and honey. <span class="verse">5:7</span> He replaced them with their sons, whom Joshua circumcised. They were uncircumcised; their fathers had not circumcised them along the way. <span class="verse">5:8</span> When all the men had been circumcised, they stayed there in the camp until they had healed. <span class="verse">5:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Joshua, “Today I have taken away the disgrace of Egypt from you.” So that place is called Gilgal even to this day. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:10</span> So the Israelites camped in Gilgal and celebrated the Passover in the evening of the fourteenth day of the month in the rift valley plains of Jericho. <span class="verse">5:11</span> They ate some of the produce of the land the day after the Passover, including unleavened bread and roasted grain. <span class="verse">5:12</span> The manna stopped appearing the day they ate some of the produce of the land; the Israelites never ate manna again. They ate from the produce of the land of Canaan that year.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Conquers Jericho</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:13</span> When Joshua was near Jericho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him holding a drawn sword. Joshua approached him and asked him, “Are you on our side or allied with our enemies?” <span class="verse">5:14</span> He answered, “Truly I am the commander of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s army. Now I have arrived!” Joshua bowed down with his face to the ground and asked, “What does my master want to say to his servant?” <span class="verse">5:15</span> The commander of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s army answered Joshua, “Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you stand is holy.” Joshua did so. </p>

</body>
</html>