<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 35</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 35</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Return to Bethel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:1</span> Then God said to Jacob, “Go up at once to Bethel and live there. Make an altar there to God, who appeared to you when you fled from your brother Esau.” <span class="verse">35:2</span> So Jacob told his household and all who were with him, “Get rid of the foreign gods you have among you. Purify yourselves and change your clothes. <span class="verse">35:3</span> Let us go up at once to Bethel. Then I will make an altar there to God, who responded to me in my time of distress and has been with me wherever I went.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:4</span> So they gave Jacob all the foreign gods that were in their possession and the rings that were in their ears. Jacob buried them under the oak near Shechem <span class="verse">35:5</span> and they started on their journey. The surrounding cities were afraid of God, and they did not pursue the sons of Jacob. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:6</span> Jacob and all those who were with him arrived at Luz (that is, Bethel) in the land of Canaan. <span class="verse">35:7</span> He built an altar there and named the place El Bethel because there God had revealed himself to him when he was fleeing from his brother. <span class="verse">35:8</span> (Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, died and was buried under the oak below Bethel; thus it was named Oak of Weeping.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:9</span> God appeared to Jacob again after he returned from Paddan Aram and blessed him. <span class="verse">35:10</span> God said to him, “Your name is Jacob, but your name will no longer be called Jacob; Israel will be your name.” So God named him Israel. <span class="verse">35:11</span> Then God said to him, “I am the Sovereign God. Be fruitful and multiply! A nation—even a company of nations—will descend from you; kings will be among your descendants! <span class="verse">35:12</span> The land I gave to Abraham and Isaac I will give to you. To your descendants I will also give this land.” <span class="verse">35:13</span> Then God went up from the place where he spoke with him. <span class="verse">35:14</span> So Jacob set up a sacred stone pillar in the place where God spoke with him. He poured out a drink offering on it, and then he poured oil on it. <span class="verse">35:15</span> Jacob named the place where God spoke with him Bethel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:16</span> They traveled on from Bethel, and when Ephrath was still some distance away, Rachel went into labor —and her labor was hard. <span class="verse">35:17</span> When her labor was at its hardest, the midwife said to her, “Don’t be afraid, for you are having another son.” <span class="verse">35:18</span> With her dying breath, she named him Ben Oni. But his father called him Benjamin instead. <span class="verse">35:19</span> So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem). <span class="verse">35:20</span> Jacob set up a marker over her grave; it is the Marker of Rachel’s Grave to this day. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:21</span> Then Israel traveled on and pitched his tent beyond Migdal Eder. <span class="verse">35:22</span> While Israel was living in that land, Reuben went to bed with Bilhah, his father’s concubine, and Israel heard about it.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Jacob had twelve sons: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:23</span> The sons of Leah were Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn, as well as Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:24</span> The sons of Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:25</span> The sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s servant, were Dan and Naphtali. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:26</span> The sons of Zilpah, Leah’s servant, were Gad and Asher.</p>
<p class="bodytext">These were the sons of Jacob who were born to him in Paddan Aram. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:27</span> So Jacob came back to his father Isaac in Mamre, to Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac had stayed. <span class="verse">35:28</span> Isaac lived to be 180 years old. <span class="verse">35:29</span> Then Isaac breathed his last and joined his ancestors. He died an old man who had lived a full life. His sons Esau and Jacob buried him.</p>

</body>
</html>