<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Judges 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Judges<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judah Takes the Lead</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> After Joshua died, the Israelites asked the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “Who should lead the invasion against the Canaanites and launch the attack?” <span class="verse">1:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “The men of Judah should take the lead. Be sure of this! I am handing the land over to them.” <span class="verse">1:3</span> The men of Judah said to their relatives, the men of Simeon, “Invade our allotted land with us and help us attack the Canaanites. Then we will go with you into your allotted land.” So the men of Simeon went with them.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:4</span> The men of Judah attacked, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> handed the Canaanites and Perizzites over to them. They killed 10,000 men at Bezek. <span class="verse">1:5</span> They met Adoni-Bezek at Bezek and fought him. They defeated the Canaanites and Perizzites. <span class="verse">1:6</span> When Adoni-Bezek ran away, they chased him and captured him. Then they cut off his thumbs and big toes. <span class="verse">1:7</span> Adoni-Bezek said, “Seventy kings, with thumbs and big toes cut off, used to lick up food scraps under my table. God has repaid me for what I did to them.” They brought him to Jerusalem, where he died. <span class="verse">1:8</span> The men of Judah attacked Jerusalem and captured it. They put the sword to it and set the city on fire. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:9</span> Later the men of Judah went down to attack the Canaanites living in the hill country, the Negev, and the foothills. <span class="verse">1:10</span> The men of Judah attacked the Canaanites living in Hebron. (Hebron used to be called Kiriath Arba.) They killed Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai. <span class="verse">1:11</span> From there they attacked the people of Debir. (Debir used to be called Kiriath Sepher.) <span class="verse">1:12</span> Caleb said, “To the man who attacks and captures Kiriath Sepher I will give my daughter Achsah as a wife.” <span class="verse">1:13</span> When Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, captured it, Caleb gave him his daughter Achsah as a wife. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:14</span> One time Achsah came and charmed her father so she could ask him for some land. When she got down from her donkey, Caleb said to her, “What would you like?” <span class="verse">1:15</span> She answered, “Please give me a special present. Since you have given me land in the Negev, now give me springs of water.” So Caleb gave her both the upper and lower springs. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:16</span> Now the descendants of the Kenite, Moses’ father-in-law, went up with the people of Judah from the city of date palm trees to Arad in the wilderness of Judah, located in the Negev. They went and lived with the people of Judah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:17</span> The men of Judah went with their brothers the men of Simeon and defeated the Canaanites living in Zephath. They wiped out Zephath. So people now call the city Hormah. <span class="verse">1:18</span> The men of Judah captured Gaza, Ashkelon, Ekron, and the territory surrounding each of these cities. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:19</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was with the men of Judah. They conquered the hill country, but they could not conquer the people living in the coastal plain, because they had chariots with iron-rimmed wheels. <span class="verse">1:20</span> Caleb received Hebron, just as Moses had promised. He drove out the three Anakites. <span class="verse">1:21</span> The men of Benjamin, however, did not conquer the Jebusites living in Jerusalem. The Jebusites live with the people of Benjamin in Jerusalem to this very day. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Partial Success</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:22</span> When the men of Joseph attacked Bethel, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was with them. <span class="verse">1:23</span> When the men of Joseph spied out Bethel (it used to be called Luz), <span class="verse">1:24</span> the spies spotted a man leaving the city. They said to him, “If you show us a secret entrance into the city, we will reward you.” <span class="verse">1:25</span> He showed them a secret entrance into the city, and they put the city to the sword. But they let the man and his extended family leave safely. <span class="verse">1:26</span> He moved to Hittite country and built a city. He named it Luz, and it has kept that name to this very day. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:27</span> The men of Manasseh did not conquer Beth Shean, Taanach, or their surrounding towns. Nor did they conquer the people living in Dor, Ibleam, Megiddo or their surrounding towns. The Canaanites managed to remain in those areas. <span class="verse">1:28</span> Whenever Israel was strong militarily, they forced the Canaanites to do hard labor, but they never totally conquered them.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:29</span> The men of Ephraim did not conquer the Canaanites living in Gezer. The Canaanites lived among them in Gezer. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:30</span> The men of Zebulun did not conquer the people living in Kitron and Nahalol. The Canaanites lived among them and were forced to do hard labor. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:31</span> The men of Asher did not conquer the people living in Acco or Sidon, nor did they conquer Ahlab, Achzib, Helbah, Aphek, or Rehob. <span class="verse">1:32</span> The people of Asher live among the Canaanites residing in the land because they did not conquer them.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:33</span> The men of Naphtali did not conquer the people living in Beth Shemesh or Beth Anath. They live among the Canaanites residing in the land. The Canaanites living in Beth Shemesh and Beth Anath were forced to do hard labor for them.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:34</span> The Amorites forced the people of Dan to live in the hill country. They did not allow them to live in the coastal plain. <span class="verse">1:35</span> The Amorites managed to remain in Har Heres, Aijalon, and Shaalbim. Whenever the tribe of Joseph was strong militarily, the Amorites were forced to do hard labor. <span class="verse">1:36</span> The border of Amorite territory ran from the Scorpion Ascent to Sela and on up. </p>

</body>
</html>