<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 72</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 72</h2><p class="psasuper">For Solomon.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:1</span> O God, grant the king the ability to make just decisions. </p>
<p class="poetry">Grant the king’s son the ability to make fair decisions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:2</span> Then he will judge your people fairly,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your oppressed ones equitably. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:3</span> The mountains will bring news of peace to the people,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the hills will announce justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:4</span> He will defend the oppressed among the people;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will deliver the children of the poor</p>
<p class="poetry">and crush the oppressor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:5</span> People will fear you as long as the sun and moon remain in the sky,</p>
<p class="poetry">for generation after generation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:6</span> He will descend like rain on the mown grass, </p>
<p class="poetry">like showers that drench the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:7</span> During his days the godly will flourish; </p>
<p class="poetry">peace will prevail as long as the moon remains in the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:8</span> May he rule from sea to sea, </p>
<p class="poetry">and from the Euphrates River to the ends of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:9</span> Before him the coastlands will bow down,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his enemies will lick the dust. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:10</span> The kings of Tarshish and the coastlands will offer gifts;</p>
<p class="poetry">the kings of Sheba and Seba will bring tribute. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:11</span> All kings will bow down to him;</p>
<p class="poetry">all nations will serve him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:12</span> For he will rescue the needy when they cry out for help,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the oppressed who have no defender.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:13</span> He will take pity on the poor and needy;</p>
<p class="poetry">the lives of the needy he will save. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:14</span> From harm and violence he will defend them; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will value their lives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:15</span> May he live! May they offer him gold from Sheba. </p>
<p class="poetry">May they continually pray for him.</p>
<p class="poetry">May they pronounce blessings on him all day long. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:16</span> May there be an abundance of grain in the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">on the tops of the mountains may it sway. </p>
<p class="poetry">May its fruit trees flourish like the forests of Lebanon. </p>
<p class="poetry">May its crops be as abundant as the grass of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:17</span> May his fame endure. </p>
<p class="poetry">May his dynasty last as long as the sun remains in the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry">May they use his name when they formulate their blessings. </p>
<p class="poetry">May all nations consider him to be favored by God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God, the God of Israel, deserves praise. </p>
<p class="poetry">He alone accomplishes amazing things. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:19</span> His glorious name deserves praise forevermore.</p>
<p class="poetry">May his majestic splendor fill the whole earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">We agree! We agree! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">72:20</span> This collection of the prayers of David son of Jesse ends here. </p>

</body>
</html>