<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prophetic Call to Genuine Repentance</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:1</span> Return, O Israel, to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">for your sin has been your downfall! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:2</span> Return to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and repent! </p>
<p class="poetry">Say to him: “Completely forgive our iniquity;</p>
<p class="poetry">accept our penitential prayer, </p>
<p class="poetry">that we may offer the praise of our lips as sacrificial bulls. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:3</span> Assyria cannot save us;</p>
<p class="poetry">we will not ride warhorses.</p>
<p class="poetry">We will never again say, ‘Our gods,’</p>
<p class="poetry">to what our own hands have made.</p>
<p class="poetry">For only you will show compassion to Orphan Israel!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Divine Promise to Relent from Judgment and to Restore Blessings</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:4</span> “I will heal their waywardness </p>
<p class="poetry">and love them freely, </p>
<p class="poetry">for my anger will turn away from them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:5</span> I will be like the dew to Israel;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will blossom like a lily,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will send down his roots like a cedar of Lebanon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:6</span> His young shoots will grow;</p>
<p class="poetry">his splendor will be like an olive tree,</p>
<p class="poetry">his fragrance like a cedar of Lebanon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:7</span> People will reside again in his shade;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will plant and harvest grain in abundance. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will blossom like a vine,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his fame will be like the wine from Lebanon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:8</span> O Ephraim, I do not want to have anything to do with idols anymore!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will answer him and care for him.</p>
<p class="poetry">I am like a luxuriant cypress tree; </p>
<p class="poetry">your fruitfulness comes from me!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concluding Exhortation</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:9</span> Who is wise? </p>
<p class="poetry">Let him discern these things!</p>
<p class="poetry">Who is discerning? </p>
<p class="poetry">Let him understand them!</p>
<p class="poetry">For the ways of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> are right;</p>
<p class="poetry">the godly walk in them,</p>
<p class="poetry">but in them the rebellious stumble. </p>

</body>
</html>