<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) John 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Vine and the Branches</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> “I am the true vine and my Father is the gardener. <span class="verse">15:2</span> He takes away every branch that does not bear fruit in me. He prunes every branch that bears fruit so that it will bear more fruit. <span class="verse">15:3</span> You are clean already because of the word that I have spoken to you. <span class="verse">15:4</span> Remain in me, and I will remain in you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself, unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you unless you remain in me. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:5</span> “I am the vine; you are the branches. The one who remains in me—and I in him—bears much fruit, because apart from me you can accomplish nothing. <span class="verse">15:6</span> If anyone does not remain in me, he is thrown out like a branch, and dries up; and such branches are gathered up and thrown into the fire, and are burned up. <span class="verse">15:7</span> If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you want, and it will be done for you. <span class="verse">15:8</span> My Father is honored by this, that you bear much fruit and show that you are my disciples. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:9</span> “Just as the Father has loved me, I have also loved you; remain in my love. <span class="verse">15:10</span> If you obey my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have obeyed my Father’s commandments and remain in his love. <span class="verse">15:11</span> I have told you these things so that my joy may be in you, and your joy may be complete. <span class="verse">15:12</span> My commandment is this—to love one another just as I have loved you. <span class="verse">15:13</span> No one has greater love than this—that one lays down his life for his friends. <span class="verse">15:14</span> You are my friends if you do what I command you. <span class="verse">15:15</span> I no longer call you slaves, because the slave does not understand what his master is doing. But I have called you friends, because I have revealed to you everything I heard from my Father. <span class="verse">15:16</span> You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit, fruit that remains, so that whatever you ask the Father in my name he will give you. <span class="verse">15:17</span> This I command you—to love one another. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The World’s Hatred</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:18</span> “If the world hates you, be aware that it hated me first. <span class="verse">15:19</span> If you belonged to the world, the world would love you as its own. However, because you do not belong to the world, but I chose you out of the world, for this reason the world hates you. <span class="verse">15:20</span> Remember what I told you, ‘A slave is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they obeyed my word, they will obey yours too. <span class="verse">15:21</span> But they will do all these things to you on account of my name, because they do not know the one who sent me. <span class="verse">15:22</span> If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. But they no longer have any excuse for their sin. <span class="verse">15:23</span> The one who hates me hates my Father too. <span class="verse">15:24</span> If I had not performed among them the miraculous deeds that no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin. But now they have seen the deeds and have hated both me and my Father. <span class="verse">15:25</span> Now this happened to fulfill the word that is written in their law, ‘<b><i>They hated me without reason</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">15:26</span> When the Advocate comes, whom I will send you from the Father—the Spirit of truth who goes out from the Father—he will testify about me, <span class="verse">15:27</span> and you also will testify, because you have been with me from the beginning. </p>

</body>
</html>