<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Eliphaz Begins to Speak </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> “If someone should attempt a word with you, </p>
<p class="poetry">will you be impatient? </p>
<p class="poetry">But who can refrain from speaking? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> Look, you have instructed many;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have strengthened feeble hands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Your words have supported those </p>
<p class="poetry">who stumbled, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you have strengthened the knees </p>
<p class="poetry">that gave way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> But now the same thing comes to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you are discouraged; </p>
<p class="poetry">it strikes you, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you are terrified. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:6</span> Is not your piety your confidence, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your blameless ways your hope? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> Call to mind now: </p>
<p class="poetry">Who, being innocent, ever perished? </p>
<p class="poetry">And where were upright people ever destroyed? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> Even as I have seen, those who plow iniquity </p>
<p class="poetry">and those who sow trouble reap the same. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:9</span> By the breath of God they perish, </p>
<p class="poetry">and by the blast of his anger they are consumed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:10</span> There is the roaring of the lion </p>
<p class="poetry">and the growling of the young lion,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the teeth of the young lions are broken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:11</span> The mighty lion perishes for lack of prey,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the cubs of the lioness are scattered. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ungodly Complainers Provoke God’s Wrath</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> “Now a word was stealthily brought to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my ear caught a whisper of it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:13</span> In the troubling thoughts of the dreams in the night</p>
<p class="poetry">when a deep sleep falls on men, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:14</span> dread gripped me and trembling, </p>
<p class="poetry">which made all my bones shake. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:15</span> Then a breath of air passes by my face;</p>
<p class="poetry">it makes the hair of my flesh stand up.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:16</span> It stands still, </p>
<p class="poetry">but I cannot recognize its appearance;</p>
<p class="poetry">an image is before my eyes, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I hear a murmuring voice: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:17</span> ‘Is a mortal man righteous before God?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or a man pure before his Creator? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:18</span> If God puts no trust in his servants </p>
<p class="poetry">and attributes folly to his angels, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:19</span> how much more to those who live in houses of clay, </p>
<p class="poetry">whose foundation is in the dust,</p>
<p class="poetry">who are crushed like a moth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:20</span> They are destroyed between morning and evening; </p>
<p class="poetry">they perish forever without anyone regarding it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:21</span> Is not their excess wealth taken away from them? </p>
<p class="poetry">They die, yet without attaining wisdom.’ </p>

</body>
</html>