<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 108</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 108</h2><p class="psasuper">A song, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:1</span> I am determined, O God.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing and praise you with my whole heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:2</span> Awake, O stringed instrument and harp.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will wake up at dawn. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:3</span> I will give you thanks before the nations, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to you before foreigners. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:4</span> For your loyal love extends beyond the sky, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your faithfulness reaches the clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:5</span> Rise up above the sky, O God.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your splendor cover the whole earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:6</span> Deliver by your power and answer me,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that the ones you love may be safe. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:7</span> God has spoken in his sanctuary: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will triumph! I will parcel out Shechem;</p>
<p class="poetry">the Valley of Sukkoth I will measure off. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:8</span> Gilead belongs to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">as does Manasseh. </p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim is my helmet, </p>
<p class="poetry">Judah my royal scepter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:9</span> Moab is my washbasin. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make Edom serve me. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will shout in triumph over Philistia.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:10</span> Who will lead me into the fortified city?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who will bring me to Edom? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:11</span> Have you not rejected us, O God?</p>
<p class="poetry">O God, you do not go into battle with our armies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:12</span> Give us help against the enemy,</p>
<p class="poetry">for any help men might offer is futile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">108:13</span> By God’s power we will conquer; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will trample down our enemies. </p>

</body>
</html>