<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Exodus 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Exodus<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Ratifies the Covenant</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:1</span>  But to Moses the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “Come up to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and worship from a distance. <span class="verse">24:2</span> Moses alone may come near the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, but the others must not come near, nor may the people go up with him.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:3</span> Moses came and told the people all the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s words and all the decisions. All the people answered together, “We are willing to do all the words that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said,” <span class="verse">24:4</span> and Moses wrote down all the words of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Early in the morning he built an altar at the foot of the mountain and arranged twelve standing stones —according to the twelve tribes of Israel. <span class="verse">24:5</span> He sent young Israelite men, and they offered burnt offerings and sacrificed young bulls for peace offerings to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">24:6</span> Moses took half of the blood and put it in bowls, and half of the blood he splashed on the altar. <span class="verse">24:7</span> He took the Book of the Covenant and read it aloud to the people, and they said, “We are willing to do and obey all that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken.” <span class="verse">24:8</span> So Moses took the blood and splashed it on the people and said, “This is the blood of the covenant that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has made with you in accordance with all these words.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:9</span> Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel went up, <span class="verse">24:10</span> and they saw the God of Israel. Under his feet there was something like a pavement made of sapphire, clear like the sky itself. <span class="verse">24:11</span> But he did not lay a hand on the leaders of the Israelites, so they saw God, and they ate and they drank. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:12</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, “Come up to me on the mountain and remain there, and I will give you the stone tablets with the law and the commandments that I have written, so that you may teach them.” <span class="verse">24:13</span> So Moses set out with Joshua his attendant, and Moses went up the mountain of God. <span class="verse">24:14</span> He told the elders, “Wait for us in this place until we return to you. Here are Aaron and Hur with you. Whoever has any matters of dispute can approach them.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:15</span> Moses went up the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain. <span class="verse">24:16</span> The glory of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> resided on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it for six days. On the seventh day he called to Moses from within the cloud. <span class="verse">24:17</span> Now the appearance of the glory of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was like a devouring fire on the top of the mountain in plain view of the people. <span class="verse">24:18</span> Moses went into the cloud when he went up the mountain, and Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights. </p>

</body>
</html>