<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 27</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:1</span> At that time the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will punish</p>
<p class="poetry">with his destructive, great, and powerful sword</p>
<p class="poetry">Leviathan the fast-moving serpent,</p>
<p class="poetry">Leviathan the squirming serpent;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will kill the sea monster. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:2</span> When that time comes, </p>
<p class="poetry">sing about a delightful vineyard! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:3</span> “I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, protect it; </p>
<p class="poetry">I water it regularly. </p>
<p class="poetry">I guard it night and day,</p>
<p class="poetry">so no one can harm it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:4</span> I am not angry.</p>
<p class="poetry">I wish I could confront some thorns and briers!</p>
<p class="poetry">Then I would march against them for battle;</p>
<p class="poetry">I would set them all on fire, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:5</span> unless they became my subjects </p>
<p class="poetry">and made peace with me;</p>
<p class="poetry">let them make peace with me.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">27:6</span> The time is coming when Jacob will take root; </p>
<p class="poetry">Israel will blossom and grow branches.</p>
<p class="poetry">The produce will fill the surface of the world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:7</span> Has the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> struck down Israel as he did their oppressors? </p>
<p class="poetry">Has Israel been killed like their enemies? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:8</span> When you summon her for divorce, you prosecute her; </p>
<p class="poetry">he drives her away with his strong wind in the day of the east wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:9</span> So in this way Jacob’s sin will be forgiven, </p>
<p class="poetry">and this is how they will show they are finished sinning: </p>
<p class="poetry">They will make all the stones of the altars </p>
<p class="poetry">like crushed limestone,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the Asherah poles and the incense altars will no longer stand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:10</span> For the fortified city is left alone;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is a deserted settlement</p>
<p class="poetry">and abandoned like the wilderness.</p>
<p class="poetry">Calves graze there;</p>
<p class="poetry">they lie down there</p>
<p class="poetry">and eat its branches bare. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:11</span> When its branches get brittle, they break;</p>
<p class="poetry">women come and use them for kindling. </p>
<p class="poetry">For these people lack understanding, </p>
<p class="poetry">therefore the one who made them has no compassion on them;</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who formed them has no mercy on them.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:12</span> At that time the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will shake the tree, from the Euphrates River to the Stream of Egypt. Then you will be gathered up one by one, O Israelites. <span class="verse">27:13</span> At that time a large trumpet will be blown, and the ones lost in the land of Assyria will come, as well as the refugees in the land of Egypt. They will worship the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> on the holy mountain in Jerusalem. </p>

</body>
</html>