<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 49</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 49</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Delivery of the Exiles</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:1</span> Listen to me, you coastlands! </p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention, you people who live far away!</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> summoned me from birth; </p>
<p class="poetry">he commissioned me when my mother brought me into the world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:2</span> He made my mouth like a sharp sword,</p>
<p class="poetry">he hid me in the hollow of his hand;</p>
<p class="poetry">he made me like a sharpened arrow,</p>
<p class="poetry">he hid me in his quiver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:3</span> He said to me, “You are my servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel, through whom I will reveal my splendor.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:4</span> But I thought, “I have worked in vain;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have expended my energy for absolutely nothing.” </p>
<p class="poetry">But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will vindicate me;</p>
<p class="poetry">my God will reward me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:5</span> So now the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who formed me from birth to be his servant—</p>
<p class="poetry">he did this to restore Jacob to himself,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that Israel might be gathered to him;</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will be honored in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sight,</p>
<p class="poetry">for my God is my source of strength —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:6</span> he says, “Is it too insignificant a task for you to be my servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">to reestablish the tribes of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">and restore the remnant of Israel? </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make you a light to the nations, </p>
<p class="poetry">so you can bring my deliverance to the remote regions of the earth.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:7</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Protector of Israel, their Holy One, says</p>
<p class="poetry">to the one who is despised and rejected by nations, </p>
<p class="poetry">a servant of rulers:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Kings will see and rise in respect, </p>
<p class="poetry">princes will bow down,</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the faithful <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Holy One of Israel who has chosen you.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">49:8</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“At the time I decide to show my favor, I will respond to you;</p>
<p class="poetry">in the day of deliverance I will help you;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will protect you and make you a covenant mediator for people, </p>
<p class="poetry">to rebuild the land </p>
<p class="poetry">and to reassign the desolate property. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:9</span> You will say to the prisoners, ‘Come out,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and to those who are in dark dungeons, ‘Emerge.’ </p>
<p class="poetry">They will graze beside the roads;</p>
<p class="poetry">on all the slopes they will find pasture. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:10</span> They will not be hungry or thirsty;</p>
<p class="poetry">the sun’s oppressive heat will not beat down on them, </p>
<p class="poetry">for one who has compassion on them will guide them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will lead them to springs of water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:11</span> I will make all my mountains into a road;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will construct my roadways.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:12</span> Look, they come from far away!</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, some come from the north and west,</p>
<p class="poetry">and others from the land of Sinim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:13</span> Shout for joy, O sky! </p>
<p class="poetry">Rejoice, O earth!</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the mountains give a joyful shout!</p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> consoles his people</p>
<p class="poetry">and shows compassion to the oppressed. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Remembers Zion</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:14</span> “Zion said, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has abandoned me,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Lord has forgotten me.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:15</span> Can a woman forget her baby who nurses at her breast? </p>
<p class="poetry">Can she withhold compassion from the child she has borne? </p>
<p class="poetry">Even if mothers were to forget,</p>
<p class="poetry">I could never forget you! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:16</span> Look, I have inscribed your name on my palms;</p>
<p class="poetry">your walls are constantly before me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:17</span> Your children hurry back,</p>
<p class="poetry">while those who destroyed and devastated you depart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:18</span> Look all around you! </p>
<p class="poetry">All of them gather to you.</p>
<p class="poetry">As surely as I live,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">“you will certainly wear all of them like jewelry;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will put them on as if you were a bride. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:19</span> Yes, your land lies in ruins;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is desolate and devastated. </p>
<p class="poetry">But now you will be too small to hold your residents,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those who devoured you will be far away.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:20</span> Yet the children born during your time of bereavement</p>
<p class="poetry">will say within your hearing,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘This place is too cramped for us, </p>
<p class="poetry">make room for us so we can live here.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:21</span> Then you will think to yourself, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Who bore these children for me?</p>
<p class="poetry">I was bereaved and barren,</p>
<p class="poetry">dismissed and divorced. </p>
<p class="poetry">Who raised these children?</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, I was left all alone;</p>
<p class="poetry">where did these children come from?’”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">49:22</span> This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Look I will raise my hand to the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will raise my signal flag to the peoples.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will bring your sons in their arms</p>
<p class="poetry">and carry your daughters on their shoulders. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:23</span> Kings will be your children’s guardians;</p>
<p class="poetry">their princesses will nurse your children. </p>
<p class="poetry">With their faces to the ground they will bow down to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they will lick the dirt on your feet.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then you will recognize that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">those who wait patiently for me are not put to shame. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:24</span> Can spoils be taken from a warrior,</p>
<p class="poetry">or captives be rescued from a conqueror? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:25</span> Indeed,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">“captives will be taken from a warrior;</p>
<p class="poetry">spoils will be rescued from a conqueror.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will oppose your adversary</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will rescue your children. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:26</span> I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will get drunk on their own blood, as if it were wine. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then all humankind will recognize that</p>
<p class="poetry">I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, your Deliverer, </p>
<p class="poetry">your Protector, the Powerful One of Jacob.” </p>

</body>
</html>