<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 27</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Assembly at Shechem</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:1</span> Then Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people: “Pay attention to all the commandments I am giving you today. <span class="verse">27:2</span> When you cross the Jordan River to the land the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is giving you, you must erect great stones and cover them with plaster. <span class="verse">27:3</span> Then you must inscribe on them all the words of this law when you cross over, so that you may enter the land the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of your ancestors, said to you. <span class="verse">27:4</span> So when you cross the Jordan you must erect on Mount Ebal these stones about which I am commanding you today, and you must cover them with plaster. <span class="verse">27:5</span> Then you must build an altar there to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, an altar of stones—do not use an iron tool on them. <span class="verse">27:6</span> You must build the altar of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God with whole stones and offer burnt offerings on it to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. <span class="verse">27:7</span> Also you must offer fellowship offerings and eat them there, rejoicing before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. <span class="verse">27:8</span> You must inscribe on the stones all the words of this law, making them clear.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:9</span> Then Moses and the Levitical priests spoke to all Israel: “Be quiet and pay attention, Israel. Today you have become the people of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. <span class="verse">27:10</span> You must obey him and keep his commandments and statutes that I am giving you today.” <span class="verse">27:11</span> Moreover, Moses commanded the people that day: <span class="verse">27:12</span> “The following tribes must stand to bless the people on Mount Gerizim when you cross the Jordan: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin. <span class="verse">27:13</span> And these other tribes must stand for the curse on Mount Ebal: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Covenant Curses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:14</span> “The Levites will call out to every Israelite with a loud voice: <span class="verse">27:15</span> ‘Cursed is the one who makes a carved or metal image—something abhorrent to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the work of the craftsman —and sets it up in a secret place.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:16</span> ‘Cursed is the one who disrespects his father and mother.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:17</span> ‘Cursed is the one who moves his neighbor’s boundary marker.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:18</span> ‘Cursed is the one who misleads a blind person on the road.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:19</span> ‘Cursed is the one who perverts justice for the resident foreigner, the orphan, and the widow.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:20</span> ‘Cursed is the one who goes to bed with his father’s former wife, for he dishonors his father.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:21</span> ‘Cursed is the one who commits bestiality.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:22</span> ‘Cursed is the one who goes to bed with his sister, the daughter of either his father or mother.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:23</span> ‘Cursed is the one who goes to bed with his mother-in-law.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:24</span> ‘Cursed is the one who kills his neighbor in private.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:25</span> ‘Cursed is the one who takes a bribe to kill an innocent person.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’ <span class="verse">27:26</span> ‘Cursed is the one who refuses to keep the words of this law.’ Then all the people will say, ‘Amen!’</p>

</body>
</html>