<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Galatians 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Galatians<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Freedom of the Believer</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> For freedom Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then, and do not be subject again to the yoke of slavery. <span class="verse">5:2</span> Listen! I, Paul, tell you that if you let yourselves be circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you at all! <span class="verse">5:3</span> And I testify again to every man who lets himself be circumcised that he is obligated to obey the whole law. <span class="verse">5:4</span> You who are trying to be declared righteous by the law have been alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace! <span class="verse">5:5</span> For through the Spirit, by faith, we wait expectantly for the hope of righteousness. <span class="verse">5:6</span> For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision carries any weight—the only thing that matters is faith working through love. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:7</span> You were running well; who prevented you from obeying the truth? <span class="verse">5:8</span> This persuasion does not come from the one who calls you! <span class="verse">5:9</span> A little yeast makes the whole batch of dough rise! <span class="verse">5:10</span> I am confident in the Lord that you will accept no other view. But the one who is confusing you will pay the penalty, whoever he may be. <span class="verse">5:11</span> Now, brothers and sisters, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been removed. <span class="verse">5:12</span> I wish those agitators would go so far as to castrate themselves! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Practice Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:13</span> For you were called to freedom, brothers and sisters; only do not use your freedom as an opportunity to indulge your flesh, but through love serve one another. <span class="verse">5:14</span> For the whole law can be summed up in a single commandment, namely, “<b><i>You must love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>.” <span class="verse">5:15</span> However, if you continually bite and devour one another, beware that you are not consumed by one another. <span class="verse">5:16</span> But I say, live by the Spirit and you will not carry out the desires of the flesh. <span class="verse">5:17</span> For the flesh has desires that are opposed to the Spirit, and the Spirit has desires that are opposed to the flesh, for these are in opposition to each other, so that you cannot do what you want. <span class="verse">5:18</span> But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law. <span class="verse">5:19</span> Now the works of the flesh are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity, depravity, <span class="verse">5:20</span> idolatry, sorcery, hostilities, strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, selfish rivalries, dissensions, factions, <span class="verse">5:21</span> envying, murder, drunkenness, carousing, and similar things. I am warning you, as I had warned you before: Those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:22</span> But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, <span class="verse">5:23</span> gentleness, and self-control. Against such things there is no law. <span class="verse">5:24</span> Now those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. <span class="verse">5:25</span> If we live by the Spirit, let us also behave in accordance with the Spirit. <span class="verse">5:26</span> Let us not become conceited, provoking one another, being jealous of one another. </p>

</body>
</html>