<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:1</span> (7:2) How beautiful are your sandaled feet,</p>
<p class="poetry">O nobleman’s daughter! </p>
<p class="poetry">The curves of your thighs are like jewels,</p>
<p class="poetry">the work of the hands of a master craftsman. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:2</span> Your navel is a round mixing bowl —</p>
<p class="poetry">may it never lack mixed wine! </p>
<p class="poetry">Your belly is a mound of wheat,</p>
<p class="poetry">encircled by lilies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:3</span> Your two breasts are like two fawns,</p>
<p class="poetry">twins of a gazelle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:4</span> Your neck is like a tower made of ivory. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your eyes are the pools in Heshbon</p>
<p class="poetry">by the gate of Bath Rabbim. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your nose is like the tower of Lebanon</p>
<p class="poetry">overlooking Damascus. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:5</span> Your head crowns you like Mount Carmel. </p>
<p class="poetry">The locks of your hair are like royal tapestries —</p>
<p class="poetry">the king is held captive in its tresses! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:6</span> How beautiful you are! How lovely,</p>
<p class="poetry">O love, with your delights! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Palm Tree and the Palm Tree Climber</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> Your stature is like a palm tree, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your breasts are like clusters of grapes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:8</span> I want to climb the palm tree, </p>
<p class="poetry">and take hold of its fruit stalks.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your breasts be like the clusters of grapes, </p>
<p class="poetry">and may the fragrance of your breath be like apples! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> May your mouth be like the best wine,</p>
<p class="poetry">flowing smoothly for my beloved,</p>
<p class="poetry">gliding gently over our lips as we sleep together. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Poetic Refrain: Mutual Possession</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:10</span> I am my beloved’s,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he desires me! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Journey to the Countryside</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:11</span> Come, my beloved, let us go to the countryside;</p>
<p class="poetry">let us spend the night in the villages. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:12</span> Let us rise early to go to the vineyards,</p>
<p class="poetry">to see if the vines have budded,</p>
<p class="poetry">to see if their blossoms have opened,</p>
<p class="poetry">if the pomegranates are in bloom—</p>
<p class="poetry">there I will give you my love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:13</span> The mandrakes send out their fragrance;</p>
<p class="poetry">over our door is every delicacy, </p>
<p class="poetry">both new and old, which I have stored up for you, my lover. </p>

</body>
</html>