<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Timothy 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Timothy<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prayer for All People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> First of all, then, I urge that requests, prayers, intercessions, and thanks be offered on behalf of all people, <span class="verse">2:2</span> even for kings and all who are in authority, that we may lead a peaceful and quiet life in all godliness and dignity. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Such prayer for all is good and welcomed before God our Savior, <span class="verse">2:4</span> since he wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth. <span class="verse">2:5</span> For there is one God and one intermediary between God and humanity, Christ Jesus, himself human, <span class="verse">2:6</span> who gave himself as a ransom for all, revealing God’s purpose at his appointed time. <span class="verse">2:7</span> For this I was appointed a preacher and apostle—I am telling the truth; I am not lying—and a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth. <span class="verse">2:8</span> So I want the men in every place to pray, lifting up holy hands without anger or dispute. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conduct of Women</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Likewise the women are to dress in suitable apparel, with modesty and self-control. Their adornment must not be with braided hair and gold or pearls or expensive clothing, <span class="verse">2:10</span> but with good deeds, as is proper for women who profess reverence for God. <span class="verse">2:11</span> A woman must learn quietly with all submissiveness. <span class="verse">2:12</span> But I do not allow a woman to teach or exercise authority over a man. She must remain quiet. <span class="verse">2:13</span> For Adam was formed first and then Eve. <span class="verse">2:14</span> And Adam was not deceived, but the woman, because she was fully deceived, fell into transgression. <span class="verse">2:15</span> But she will be delivered through childbearing, if she continues in faith and love and holiness with self-control. </p>

</body>
</html>