<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Every Effect has its Cause</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Listen, you Israelites, to this message that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is proclaiming against you! This message is for the entire clan I brought up from the land of Egypt: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> “I have chosen you alone from all the clans of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">Therefore I will punish you for all your sins.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> Do two walk together without having met? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> Does a lion roar in the woods if he has not cornered his prey? </p>
<p class="poetry">Does a young lion bellow from his den if he has not caught something?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> Does a bird swoop down into a trap on the ground if there is no bait?</p>
<p class="poetry">Does a trap spring up from the ground unless it has surely caught something? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> If an alarm sounds in a city, do people not fear? </p>
<p class="poetry">If disaster overtakes a city, is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> not responsible? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Certainly the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does nothing without first revealing his plan to his servants the prophets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> A lion has roared! Who is not afraid?</p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken. Who can refuse to prophesy? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Samaria Will Fall</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Make this announcement in the fortresses of Ashdod</p>
<p class="poetry">and in the fortresses in the land of Egypt.</p>
<p class="poetry">Say this:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Gather on the hills around Samaria! </p>
<p class="poetry">Observe the many acts of violence taking place within the city, </p>
<p class="poetry">the oppressive deeds occurring in it.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">3:10</span> “They do not know how to do what is right,” the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says.</p>
<p class="poetry">“They store up the spoils of destructive violence in their fortresses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> Therefore,” says the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “an enemy will encircle the land. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will take away your power; </p>
<p class="poetry">your fortresses will be looted.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Just as a shepherd salvages from the lion’s mouth a couple of leg bones or a piece of an ear,</p>
<p class="poetry">so the Israelites who live in Samaria will be salvaged. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will be left with just a corner of a bed, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a part of a couch. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> Listen and warn the family of Jacob!” </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God who commands armies, is speaking! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">3:14</span> “Certainly when I punish Israel for their covenant transgressions, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will destroy Bethel’s altars.</p>
<p class="poetry">The horns of the altar will be cut off and fall to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> I will destroy both the winter and summer houses. </p>
<p class="poetry">The houses filled with ivory will be ruined,</p>
<p class="poetry">the great houses will be swept away.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking! </p>

</body>
</html>