<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 40</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 40</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Cupbearer and the Baker</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:1</span> After these things happened, the cupbearer to the king of Egypt and the royal baker offended their master, the king of Egypt. <span class="verse">40:2</span> Pharaoh was enraged with his two officials, the cupbearer and the baker, <span class="verse">40:3</span> so he imprisoned them in the house of the captain of the guard in the same facility where Joseph was confined. <span class="verse">40:4</span> The captain of the guard appointed Joseph to be their attendant, and he served them. </p>
<p class="bodytext">They spent some time in custody. <span class="verse">40:5</span> Both of them, the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, had a dream the same night. Each man’s dream had its own meaning. <span class="verse">40:6</span> When Joseph came to them in the morning, he saw that they were looking depressed. <span class="verse">40:7</span> So he asked Pharaoh’s officials, who were with him in custody in his master’s house, “Why do you look so sad today?” <span class="verse">40:8</span> They told him, “We both had dreams, but there is no one to interpret them.” Joseph responded, “Don’t interpretations belong to God? Tell them to me.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:9</span> So the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph: “In my dream, there was a vine in front of me. <span class="verse">40:10</span> On the vine there were three branches. As it budded, its blossoms opened and its clusters ripened into grapes. <span class="verse">40:11</span> Now Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand, so I took the grapes, squeezed them into his cup, and put the cup in Pharaoh’s hand.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:12</span> “This is its meaning,” Joseph said to him. “The three branches represent three days. <span class="verse">40:13</span> In three more days Pharaoh will reinstate you and restore you to your office. You will put Pharaoh’s cup in his hand, just as you did before when you were cupbearer. <span class="verse">40:14</span> But remember me when it goes well for you, and show me kindness. Make mention of me to Pharaoh and bring me out of this prison, <span class="verse">40:15</span> for I really was kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews and I have done nothing wrong here for which they should put me in a dungeon.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:16</span> When the chief baker saw that the interpretation of the first dream was favorable, he said to Joseph, “I also appeared in my dream and there were three baskets of white bread on my head. <span class="verse">40:17</span> In the top basket there were baked goods of every kind for Pharaoh, but the birds were eating them from the basket that was on my head.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:18</span> Joseph replied, “This is its meaning: The three baskets represent three days. <span class="verse">40:19</span> In three more days Pharaoh will decapitate you and impale you on a pole. Then the birds will eat your flesh from you.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:20</span> On the third day it was Pharaoh’s birthday, so he gave a feast for all his servants. He “lifted up” the head of the chief cupbearer and the head of the chief baker in the midst of his servants. <span class="verse">40:21</span> He restored the chief cupbearer to his former position so that he placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand, <span class="verse">40:22</span> but the chief baker he impaled, just as Joseph had predicted. <span class="verse">40:23</span> But the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph—he forgot him. </p>

</body>
</html>