<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Philippians 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Philippians<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the overseers and deacons. <span class="verse">1:2</span> Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prayer for the Church</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> I thank my God every time I remember you. <span class="verse">1:4</span> I always pray with joy in my every prayer for all of you <span class="verse">1:5</span> because of your participation in the gospel from the first day until now. <span class="verse">1:6</span> For I am sure of this very thing, that the one who began a good work in you will perfect it until the day of Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">1:7</span> For it is right for me to think this about all of you, because I have you in my heart, since both in my imprisonment and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel all of you became partners in God’s grace together with me. <span class="verse">1:8</span> For God is my witness that I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">1:9</span> And I pray this, that your love may abound even more and more in knowledge and every kind of insight <span class="verse">1:10</span> so that you can decide what is best, and thus be sincere and blameless for the day of Christ, <span class="verse">1:11</span> filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle"> Ministry as a Prisoner</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:12</span> I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that my situation has actually turned out to advance the gospel: <span class="verse">1:13</span> The whole imperial guard and everyone else knows that I am in prison for the sake of Christ, <span class="verse">1:14</span> and most of the brothers and sisters, having confidence in the Lord because of my imprisonment, now more than ever dare to speak the word fearlessly. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:15</span> Some, to be sure, are preaching Christ from envy and rivalry, but others from goodwill. <span class="verse">1:16</span> The latter do so from love because they know that I am placed here for the defense of the gospel. <span class="verse">1:17</span> The former proclaim Christ from selfish ambition, not sincerely, because they think they can cause trouble for me in my imprisonment. <span class="verse">1:18</span> What is the result? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being proclaimed, and in this I rejoice.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Yes, and I will continue to rejoice, <span class="verse">1:19</span> for I know that this will turn out for my deliverance through your prayers and the help of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">1:20</span> My confident hope is that I will in no way be ashamed but that with complete boldness, even now as always, Christ will be exalted in my body, whether I live or die. <span class="verse">1:21</span> For to me, living is Christ and dying is gain. <span class="verse">1:22</span> Now if I am to go on living in the body, this will mean productive work for me, yet I don’t know which I prefer: <span class="verse">1:23</span> I feel torn between the two, because I have a desire to depart and be with Christ, which is better by far, <span class="verse">1:24</span> but it is more vital for your sake that I remain in the body. <span class="verse">1:25</span> And since I am sure of this, I know that I will remain and continue with all of you for the sake of your progress and joy in the faith, <span class="verse">1:26</span> so that what you can be proud of may increase because of me in Christ Jesus, when I come back to you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:27</span> Only conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ so that—whether I come and see you or whether I remain absent—I should hear that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one mind, by contending side by side for the faith of the gospel, <span class="verse">1:28</span> and by not being intimidated in any way by your opponents. This is a sign of their destruction, but of your salvation—a sign which is from God. <span class="verse">1:29</span> For it has been granted to you not only to believe in Christ but also to suffer for him, <span class="verse">1:30</span> since you are encountering the same conflict that you saw me face and now hear that I am facing. </p>

</body>
</html>