<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 26</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 26</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to Bildad </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:1</span> Then Job replied: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:2</span> “How you have helped the powerless! </p>
<p class="poetry">How you have saved the person who has no strength! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:3</span> How you have advised the one without wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">and abundantly revealed your insight! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:4</span> To whom did you utter these words?</p>
<p class="poetry">And whose spirit has come forth from your mouth? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Better Description of God’s Greatness </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:5</span> “The dead tremble —</p>
<p class="poetry">those beneath the waters </p>
<p class="poetry">and all that live in them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:6</span> The underworld is naked before God; </p>
<p class="poetry">the place of destruction lies uncovered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:7</span> He spreads out the northern skies over empty space; </p>
<p class="poetry">he suspends the earth on nothing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:8</span> He locks the waters in his clouds,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the clouds do not burst with the weight of them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:9</span> He conceals the face of the full moon, </p>
<p class="poetry">shrouding it with his clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:10</span> He marks out the horizon on the surface of the waters</p>
<p class="poetry">as a boundary between light and darkness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:11</span> The pillars of the heavens tremble</p>
<p class="poetry">and are amazed at his rebuke. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:12</span> By his power he stills the sea;</p>
<p class="poetry">by his wisdom he cut Rahab the great sea monster to pieces. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:13</span> By his breath the skies became fair;</p>
<p class="poetry">his hand pierced the fleeing serpent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:14</span> Indeed, these are but the outer fringes of his ways! </p>
<p class="poetry">How faint is the whisper we hear of him!</p>
<p class="poetry">But who can understand the thunder of his power?” </p>

</body>
</html>