<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Admonition to Follow Righteousness and Avoid Wickedness </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Listen, children, to a father’s instruction, </p>
<p class="poetry">and pay attention so that you may gain discernment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> Because I hereby give you good instruction,</p>
<p class="poetry">do not forsake my teaching.</p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> When I was a son to my father, </p>
<p class="poetry">a tender, only child before my mother, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> he taught me, and he said to me:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Let your heart lay hold of my words;</p>
<p class="poetry">keep my commands so that you will live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not forget and do not turn aside from the words I speak. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:6</span> Do not forsake wisdom, and she will protect you;</p>
<p class="poetry">love her, and she will guard you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> Wisdom is supreme —so acquire wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">and whatever you acquire, acquire understanding! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> Esteem her highly and she will exalt you;</p>
<p class="poetry">she will honor you if you embrace her.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:9</span> She will place a fair garland on your head;</p>
<p class="poetry">she will bestow a beautiful crown on you.”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:10</span> Listen, my child, and accept my words,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that the years of your life will be many. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:11</span> I hereby guide you in the way of wisdom</p>
<p class="poetry">and I lead you in upright paths. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> When you walk, your steps will not be hampered, </p>
<p class="poetry">and when you run, you will not stumble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:13</span> Hold on to instruction, do not let it go;</p>
<p class="poetry">protect it, because it is your life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:14</span> Do not enter the path of the wicked</p>
<p class="poetry">or walk in the way of those who are evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:15</span> Avoid it, do not go on it;</p>
<p class="poetry">turn away from it, and go on. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:16</span> For they cannot sleep unless they cause harm; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are robbed of sleep until they make someone stumble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:17</span> Indeed they have eaten bread gained from wickedness </p>
<p class="poetry">and drink wine obtained from violence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:18</span> But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light, </p>
<p class="poetry">growing brighter and brighter until full day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:19</span> The way of the wicked is like gloomy darkness;</p>
<p class="poetry">they do not know what they stumble over. </p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:20</span> My child, pay attention to my words;</p>
<p class="poetry">listen attentively to my sayings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:21</span> Do not let them depart from your sight,</p>
<p class="poetry">guard them within your heart; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:22</span> for they are life to those who find them </p>
<p class="poetry">and healing to one’s entire body. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:23</span> Guard your heart with all vigilance, </p>
<p class="poetry">for from it are the sources of life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:24</span> Remove perverse speech from your mouth; </p>
<p class="poetry">keep devious talk far from your lips. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:25</span> Let your eyes look directly in front of you</p>
<p class="poetry">and let your gaze look straight before you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:26</span> Make the path for your feet level, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that all your ways may be established. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:27</span> Do not turn to the right or to the left;</p>
<p class="poetry">turn yourself away from evil. </p>

</body>
</html>