<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Refinement of Judah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> “In that day there will be a fountain opened up for the dynasty of David and the people of Jerusalem to cleanse them from sin and impurity. <span class="verse">13:2</span> And also on that day,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, “I will remove the names of the idols from the land and they will never again be remembered. Moreover, I will remove the prophets and the unclean spirit from the land. <span class="verse">13:3</span> Then, if anyone prophesies in spite of this, his father and mother to whom he was born will say to him, ‘You cannot live, for you lie in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’ Then his father and mother to whom he was born will run him through with a sword when he prophesies. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:4</span> “Therefore, on that day each prophet will be ashamed of his vision when he prophesies and will no longer wear the hairy garment of a prophet to deceive the people. <span class="verse">13:5</span> Instead he will say, ‘I am no prophet; indeed, I am a farmer, for a man has made me his indentured servant since my youth.’ <span class="verse">13:6</span> Then someone will ask him, ‘What are these wounds on your chest?’ and he will answer, ‘Some that I received in the house of my friends.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:7</span> “Awake, sword, against my shepherd,</p>
<p class="poetry">against the man who is my associate,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies.</p>
<p class="poetry">“Strike the shepherd that the flock may be scattered; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will turn my hand against the insignificant ones.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:8</span> It will happen in all the land,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">“that two-thirds of the people in it will be cut off and die,</p>
<p class="poetry">but one-third will be left in it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:9</span> Then I will bring the remaining third into the fire;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will refine them like silver is refined</p>
<p class="poetry">and will test them like gold is tested.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will call on my name and I will answer;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will say, ‘These are my people,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and they will say, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is our God.’” </p>

</body>
</html>