<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lost Lover Found</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Maidens to the Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Where has your beloved gone,</p>
<p class="poetry">O most beautiful among women?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where has your beloved turned?</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell us, that we may seek him with you. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to the Maidens:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:2</span> My beloved has gone down to his garden, </p>
<p class="poetry">to the flowerbeds of balsam spices, </p>
<p class="poetry">to graze in the gardens,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to gather lilies. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Poetic Refrain: Mutual Possession</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:3</span> I am my lover’s and my lover is mine; </p>
<p class="poetry">he grazes among the lilies. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Renewal of Love</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:4</span> My darling, you are as beautiful as Tirzah, </p>
<p class="poetry">as lovely as Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry">as awe-inspiring as bannered armies.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:5</span> Turn your eyes away from me—</p>
<p class="poetry">they overwhelm me!</p>
<p class="poetry">Your hair is like a flock of goats</p>
<p class="poetry">descending from Mount Gilead. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:6</span> Your teeth are like a flock of sheep</p>
<p class="poetry">coming up from the washing;</p>
<p class="poetry">each has its twin;</p>
<p class="poetry">not one of them is missing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:7</span> Like a slice of pomegranate</p>
<p class="poetry">is your forehead behind your veil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:8</span> There may be sixty queens,</p>
<p class="poetry">and eighty concubines,</p>
<p class="poetry">and young women without number. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:9</span> But she is unique, </p>
<p class="poetry">my dove, my perfect one!</p>
<p class="poetry">She is the special daughter of her mother;</p>
<p class="poetry">she is the favorite of the one who bore her.</p>
<p class="poetry">The maidens saw her and complimented her; </p>
<p class="poetry">the queens and concubines praised her:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:10</span> “Who is this who appears like the dawn? </p>
<p class="poetry">Beautiful as the moon, bright as the sun,</p>
<p class="poetry">awe-inspiring as the stars in procession?” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Return to the Vineyards</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved: </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:11</span> I went down to the orchard of walnut trees, </p>
<p class="poetry">to look for the blossoms of the valley, </p>
<p class="poetry">to see if the vines had budded</p>
<p class="poetry">or if the pomegranates were in bloom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:12</span>  I was beside myself with joy! </p>
<p class="poetry">There please give me your myrrh, </p>
<p class="poetry">O daughter of my princely people. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Love Song and Dance</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:13</span> (7:1) Turn, turn, O Perfect One! </p>
<p class="poetry">Turn, turn, that I may stare at you!</p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry">Why do you gaze upon the Perfect One</p>
<p class="poetry">like the dance of the Mahanaim? </p>

</body>
</html>