<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 53</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 53</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:1</span> Who would have believed what we just heard? </p>
<p class="poetry">When was the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s power revealed through him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:2</span> He sprouted up like a twig before God, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a root out of parched soil; </p>
<p class="poetry">he had no stately form or majesty that might catch our attention, </p>
<p class="poetry">no special appearance that we should want to follow him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:3</span> He was despised and rejected by people, </p>
<p class="poetry">one who experienced pain and was acquainted with illness;</p>
<p class="poetry">people hid their faces from him; </p>
<p class="poetry">he was despised, and we considered him insignificant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:4</span> But he lifted up our illnesses,</p>
<p class="poetry">he carried our pain; </p>
<p class="poetry">even though we thought he was being punished,</p>
<p class="poetry">attacked by God, and afflicted for something he had done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:5</span> He was wounded because of our rebellious deeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">crushed because of our sins;</p>
<p class="poetry">he endured punishment that made us well; </p>
<p class="poetry">because of his wounds we have been healed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:6</span> All of us had wandered off like sheep;</p>
<p class="poetry">each of us had strayed off on his own path,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> caused the sin of all of us to attack him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:7</span> He was treated harshly and afflicted, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he did not even open his mouth.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a lamb led to the slaughtering block,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a sheep silent before her shearers,</p>
<p class="poetry">he did not even open his mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:8</span> He was led away after an unjust trial —</p>
<p class="poetry">but who even cared? </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, he was cut off from the land of the living; </p>
<p class="poetry">because of the rebellion of his own people he was wounded. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:9</span> They intended to bury him with criminals, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he ended up in a rich man’s tomb, </p>
<p class="poetry">because he had committed no violent deeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor had he spoken deceitfully. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:10</span> Though the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> desired to crush him and make him ill,</p>
<p class="poetry">once restitution is made, </p>
<p class="poetry">he will see descendants and enjoy long life, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s purpose will be accomplished through him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:11</span> Having suffered, he will reflect on his work,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will be satisfied when he understands what he has done. </p>
<p class="poetry">“My servant will acquit many, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he carried their sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">53:12</span> So I will assign him a portion with the multitudes, </p>
<p class="poetry">he will divide the spoils of victory with the powerful, </p>
<p class="poetry">because he willingly submitted to death</p>
<p class="poetry">and was numbered with the rebels,</p>
<p class="poetry">when he lifted up the sin of many</p>
<p class="poetry">and intervened on behalf of the rebels.” </p>

</body>
</html>