<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Purity in Public Worship</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> A man with crushed or severed genitals may not enter the assembly of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">23:2</span> A person of illegitimate birth may not enter the assembly of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; to the tenth generation no one related to him may do so. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:3</span> No Ammonite or Moabite may enter the assembly of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; to the tenth generation none of their descendants shall ever do so, <span class="verse">23:4</span> for they did not meet you with food and water on the way as you came from Egypt, and furthermore, they hired Balaam son of Beor of Pethor in Aram Naharaim to curse you. <span class="verse">23:5</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God refused to listen to Balaam and changed the curse to a blessing, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God loves you. <span class="verse">23:6</span> You must not seek peace and prosperity for them through all the ages to come. <span class="verse">23:7</span> You must not hate an Edomite, for he is your relative; you must not hate an Egyptian, for you lived as a foreigner in his land. <span class="verse">23:8</span> Children of the third generation born to them may enter the assembly of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Purity in Personal Hygiene</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:9</span> When you go out as an army against your enemies, guard yourselves against anything impure. <span class="verse">23:10</span> If there is someone among you who is impure because of some nocturnal emission, he must leave the camp; he may not reenter it immediately. <span class="verse">23:11</span> When evening arrives he must wash himself with water, and then at sunset he may reenter the camp. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:12</span> You are to have a place outside the camp to serve as a latrine. <span class="verse">23:13</span> You must have a spade among your other equipment, and when you relieve yourself outside you must dig a hole with the spade and then turn and cover your excrement. <span class="verse">23:14</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God walks about in the middle of your camp to deliver you and defeat your enemies for you. Therefore your camp should be holy, so that he does not see anything indecent among you and turn away from you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Purity in the Treatment of the Unprivileged</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:15</span> You must not return an escaped slave to his master when he has run away to you. <span class="verse">23:16</span> Indeed, he may live among you in any place he chooses, in whichever of your villages he prefers; you must not oppress him.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Cultic Prostitution Banned</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:17</span> There must never be a sacred prostitute among the young women of Israel nor a sacred male prostitute among the young men of Israel. <span class="verse">23:18</span> You must never bring the pay of a female prostitute or the wage of a male prostitute into the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God in fulfillment of any vow, for both of these are abhorrent to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Respect for Others’ Property</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:19</span> You must not charge interest on a loan to your fellow Israelite, whether on money, food, or anything else that has been loaned with interest. <span class="verse">23:20</span> You may lend with interest to a foreigner, but not to your fellow Israelite; if you keep this command the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God will bless you in all you undertake in the land you are about to enter to possess. <span class="verse">23:21</span> When you make a vow to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God you must not delay in fulfilling it, for otherwise he will surely hold you accountable as a sinner. <span class="verse">23:22</span> If you refrain from making a vow, it will not be sinful. <span class="verse">23:23</span> Whatever you vow, you must be careful to do what you have promised, such as what you have vowed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God as a freewill offering. <span class="verse">23:24</span> When you enter the vineyard of your neighbor you may eat as many grapes as you please, but you must not take away any in a container. <span class="verse">23:25</span> When you go into the ripe grain fields of your neighbor you may pluck off the kernels with your hand, but you must not use a sickle on your neighbor’s ripe grain. </p>

</body>
</html>