<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 85</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 85</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, written by the Korahites, a psalm.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you showed favor to your land;</p>
<p class="poetry">you restored the well-being of Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:2</span> You pardoned the wrongdoing of your people;</p>
<p class="poetry">you forgave all their sin. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:3</span> You withdrew all your fury;</p>
<p class="poetry">you turned back from your raging anger. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:4</span> Restore us, O God our deliverer.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not be displeased with us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:5</span> Will you stay mad at us forever?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will you remain angry throughout future generations? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:6</span> Will you not revive us once more?</p>
<p class="poetry">Then your people will rejoice in you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:7</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, show us your loyal love.</p>
<p class="poetry">Bestow on us your deliverance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:8</span> I will listen to what God the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says. </p>
<p class="poetry">For he will make peace with his people, his faithful followers. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yet they must not return to their foolish ways.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:9</span> Certainly his loyal followers will soon experience his deliverance; </p>
<p class="poetry">then his splendor will again appear in our land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:10</span> Loyal love and faithfulness meet; </p>
<p class="poetry">deliverance and peace greet each other with a kiss. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:11</span> Faithfulness grows from the ground,</p>
<p class="poetry">and deliverance looks down from the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:12</span> Yes, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will bestow his good blessings, </p>
<p class="poetry">and our land will yield its crops. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">85:13</span> Deliverance goes before him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and prepares a pathway for him. </p>

</body>
</html>