<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 109</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 109</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:1</span> O God whom I praise, do not ignore me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:2</span> For they say cruel and deceptive things to me;</p>
<p class="poetry">they lie to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:3</span> They surround me and say hateful things; </p>
<p class="poetry">they attack me for no reason. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:4</span> They repay my love with accusations, </p>
<p class="poetry">but I continue to pray. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:5</span> They repay me evil for good, </p>
<p class="poetry">and hate for love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:6</span>  Appoint an evil man to testify against him. </p>
<p class="poetry">May an accuser stand at his right side. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:7</span> When he is judged, he will be found guilty. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then his prayer will be regarded as sinful.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:8</span> May his days be few. </p>
<p class="poetry">May another take his job. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:9</span> May his children be fatherless,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his wife a widow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:10</span> May his children roam around begging,</p>
<p class="poetry">asking for handouts as they leave their ruined home. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:11</span> May the creditor seize all he owns.</p>
<p class="poetry">May strangers loot his property. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:12</span> May no one show him kindness. </p>
<p class="poetry">May no one have compassion on his fatherless children.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:13</span> May his descendants be cut off. </p>
<p class="poetry">May the memory of them be wiped out by the time the next generation arrives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:14</span> May his ancestors’ sins be remembered by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">May his mother’s sin not be forgotten. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:15</span> May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> be constantly aware of them, </p>
<p class="poetry">and cut off the memory of his children from the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:16</span> For he never bothered to show kindness; </p>
<p class="poetry">he harassed the oppressed and needy,</p>
<p class="poetry">and killed the disheartened. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:17</span> He loved to curse others, so those curses have come upon him. </p>
<p class="poetry">He had no desire to bless anyone, so he has experienced no blessings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:18</span> He made cursing a way of life, </p>
<p class="poetry">so curses poured into his stomach like water</p>
<p class="poetry">and seeped into his bones like oil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:19</span> May a curse attach itself to him, like a garment one puts on, </p>
<p class="poetry">or a belt one wears continually. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:20</span> May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> repay my accusers in this way, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who say evil things about me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:21</span> O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">intervene on my behalf for the sake of your reputation. </p>
<p class="poetry">Because your loyal love is good, deliver me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:22</span> For I am oppressed and needy,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my heart beats violently within me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:23</span> I am fading away like a shadow at the end of the day; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am shaken off like a locust. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:24</span> I am so starved my knees shake; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have turned into skin and bones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:25</span> I am disdained by them. </p>
<p class="poetry">When they see me, they shake their heads. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:26</span> Help me, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Because you are faithful to me, deliver me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:27</span> Then they will realize this is your work, </p>
<p class="poetry">and that you, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have accomplished it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:28</span> They curse, but you will bless. </p>
<p class="poetry">When they attack, they will be humiliated, </p>
<p class="poetry">but your servant will rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:29</span> My accusers will be covered with shame,</p>
<p class="poetry">and draped in humiliation as if it were a robe. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:30</span> I will thank the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> profusely. </p>
<p class="poetry">In the middle of a crowd I will praise him,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">109:31</span> because he stands at the right hand of the needy,</p>
<p class="poetry">to deliver him from those who threaten his life. </p>

</body>
</html>