<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Repentance of Judah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> This is an oracle, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message concerning Israel: The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—he who stretches out the heavens and lays the foundations of the earth, who forms the human spirit within a person —says, <span class="verse">12:2</span> “I am about to make Jerusalem a cup that brings dizziness to all the surrounding nations; indeed, Judah will also be included when Jerusalem is besieged. <span class="verse">12:3</span> Moreover, on that day I will make Jerusalem a heavy burden for all the nations, and all who try to carry it will be seriously injured; yet all the peoples of the earth will be assembled against it. <span class="verse">12:4</span> On that day,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “I will strike every horse with confusion and its rider with madness. I will pay close attention to the house of Judah, but will strike all the horses of the nations with blindness. <span class="verse">12:5</span> Then the leaders of Judah will say to themselves, ‘The inhabitants of Jerusalem are a means of strength to us through their God, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies.’ <span class="verse">12:6</span> On that day I will make the leaders of Judah like an igniter among sticks and a burning torch among sheaves, and they will burn up all the surrounding nations right and left. Then the people of Jerusalem will settle once more in their place, the city of Jerusalem. <span class="verse">12:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> also will deliver the homes of Judah first, so that the splendor of the kingship of David and of the people of Jerusalem may not exceed that of Judah. <span class="verse">12:8</span> On that day the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> himself will defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the weakest among them will be like mighty David, and the dynasty of David will be like God, like the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> before them. <span class="verse">12:9</span> So on that day I will set out to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:10</span> “I will pour out on the kingship of David and the population of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and supplication so that they will look to me, the one they have pierced. They will lament for him as one laments for an only son, and there will be a bitter cry for him like the bitter cry for a firstborn. <span class="verse">12:11</span> On that day the lamentation in Jerusalem will be as great as the lamentation at Hadad Rimmon in the plain of Megiddo. <span class="verse">12:12</span> The land will mourn, each clan by itself—the clan of the royal household of David by itself and their wives by themselves; the clan of the family of Nathan by itself and their wives by themselves; <span class="verse">12:13</span> the clan of the descendants of Levi by itself and their wives by themselves; and the clan of the Shimeites by itself and their wives by themselves; <span class="verse">12:14</span> all the clans that remain, each separately with their wives. </p>

</body>
</html>