<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> When Rehoboam arrived in Jerusalem, he summoned 180,000 skilled warriors from Judah and Benjamin to attack Israel and restore the kingdom to Rehoboam. <span class="verse">11:2</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to the prophet Shemaiah, <span class="verse">11:3</span> “Say this to King Rehoboam son of Solomon of Judah and to all the Israelites in Judah and Benjamin, <span class="verse">11:4</span> ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says this: “Do not attack and make war with your brothers. Each of you go home, for I have caused this to happen.”’” They obeyed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and called off the attack against Jeroboam. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rehoboam’s Reign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:5</span> Rehoboam lived in Jerusalem; he built up these fortified cities throughout Judah: <span class="verse">11:6</span> Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa, <span class="verse">11:7</span> Beth Zur, Soco, Adullam, <span class="verse">11:8</span> Gath, Mareshah, Ziph, <span class="verse">11:9</span> Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah, <span class="verse">11:10</span> Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron. These were the fortified cities in Judah and Benjamin. <span class="verse">11:11</span> He fortified these cities and placed officers in them, as well as storehouses of food, olive oil, and wine. <span class="verse">11:12</span> In each city there were shields and spears; he strongly fortified them. Judah and Benjamin belonged to him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:13</span> The priests and Levites who lived throughout Israel supported him, no matter where they resided. <span class="verse">11:14</span> The Levites even left their pasturelands and their property behind and came to Judah and Jerusalem, for Jeroboam and his sons prohibited them from serving as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s priests. <span class="verse">11:15</span> Jeroboam appointed his own priests to serve at the worship centers and to lead in the worship of the goat idols and calf idols he had made. <span class="verse">11:16</span> Those among all the Israelite tribes who were determined to worship the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel followed them to Jerusalem to sacrifice to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors. <span class="verse">11:17</span> They supported the kingdom of Judah and were loyal to Rehoboam son of Solomon for three years; they followed the edicts of David and Solomon for three years. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:18</span> Rehoboam married Mahalath the daughter of David’s son Jerimoth and of Abihail, the daughter of Jesse’s son Eliab. <span class="verse">11:19</span> She bore him sons named Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham. <span class="verse">11:20</span> He later married Maacah the daughter of Absalom. She bore to him Abijah, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith. <span class="verse">11:21</span> Rehoboam loved Maacah daughter of Absalom more than his other wives and concubines. He had eighteen wives and sixty concubines; he fathered twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:22</span> Rehoboam appointed Abijah son of Maacah as the leader over his brothers, for he intended to name him his successor. <span class="verse">11:23</span> He wisely placed some of his many sons throughout the regions of Judah and Benjamin in the various fortified cities. He supplied them with abundant provisions and acquired many wives for them. </p>

</body>
</html>