<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hebrews 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Exhortations</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> Brotherly love must continue. <span class="verse">13:2</span> Do not neglect hospitality, because through it some have entertained angels without knowing it. <span class="verse">13:3</span> Remember those in prison as though you were in prison with them, and those ill-treated as though you too felt their torment. <span class="verse">13:4</span> Marriage must be honored among all and the marriage bed kept undefiled, for God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers. <span class="verse">13:5</span> Your conduct must be free from the love of money and you must be content with what you have, for he has said, “<b><i>I will never leave you and I will never abandon you</i></b>.” <span class="verse">13:6</span> So we can say with confidence, “<i><b>The Lord is my helper, and</b></i> <i><b>I will not be afraid</b>. <b>What can people do to me?</b></i>” <span class="verse">13:7</span> Remember your leaders, who spoke God’s message to you; reflect on the outcome of their lives and imitate their faith. <span class="verse">13:8</span> Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever! <span class="verse">13:9</span> Do not be carried away by all sorts of strange teachings. For it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not ritual meals, which have never benefited those who participated in them. <span class="verse">13:10</span> We have an altar that those who serve in the tabernacle have no right to eat from. <span class="verse">13:11</span> For the bodies of those animals whose blood the high priest brings into the sanctuary as an offering for sin are burned outside the camp. <span class="verse">13:12</span> Therefore, to sanctify the people by his own blood, Jesus also suffered outside the camp. <span class="verse">13:13</span> We must go out to him, then, outside the camp, bearing the abuse he experienced. <span class="verse">13:14</span> For here we have no lasting city, but we seek the city that is to come. <span class="verse">13:15</span> Through him then let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of our lips, acknowledging his name. <span class="verse">13:16</span> And do not neglect to do good and to share what you have, for God is pleased with such sacrifices. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:17</span> Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over your souls and will give an account for their work. Let them do this with joy and not with complaints, for this would be no advantage for you. <span class="verse">13:18</span> Pray for us, for we are sure that we have a clear conscience and desire to conduct ourselves rightly in every respect. <span class="verse">13:19</span> I especially ask you to pray that I may be restored to you very soon. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Benediction and Conclusion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:20</span> Now may the God of peace who by the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus, <span class="verse">13:21</span> equip you with every good thing to do his will, working in us what is pleasing before him through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever. Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:22</span> Now I urge you, brothers and sisters, bear with my message of exhortation, for in fact I have written to you briefly. <span class="verse">13:23</span> You should know that our brother Timothy has been released. If he comes soon, he will be with me when I see you. <span class="verse">13:24</span> Greetings to all your leaders and all the saints. Those from Italy send you greetings. <span class="verse">13:25</span> Grace be with you all. </p>

</body>
</html>