<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:1</span> Do not envy evil people, </p>
<p class="poetry">do not desire to be with them;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:2</span> for their hearts contemplate violence,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their lips speak harm. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:3</span> By wisdom a house is built, </p>
<p class="poetry">and through understanding it is established; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:4</span> by knowledge its rooms are filled</p>
<p class="poetry">with all kinds of precious and pleasing treasures.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:5</span> A wise warrior is strong, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a man of knowledge makes his strength stronger; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:6</span> for with guidance you wage your war,</p>
<p class="poetry">and with numerous advisers there is victory. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:7</span> Wisdom is unattainable for a fool;</p>
<p class="poetry">in court he does not open his mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:8</span> The one who plans to do evil</p>
<p class="poetry">will be called a scheming person. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:9</span> A foolish scheme is sin,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the scorner is an abomination to people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:10</span> You have slacked off in the day of trouble — </p>
<p class="poetry">your strength is small! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:11</span> Deliver those being taken away to death,</p>
<p class="poetry">and hold back those slipping to the slaughter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:12</span> If you say, “But we did not know about this,”</p>
<p class="poetry">won’t the one who evaluates hearts discern it?</p>
<p class="poetry">Won’t the one who guards your life realize </p>
<p class="poetry">and repay each person according to his deeds? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:13</span> Eat honey, my child, for it is good,</p>
<p class="poetry">and honey from the honeycomb is sweet to your taste. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:14</span> Likewise, know that wisdom is sweet to your soul;</p>
<p class="poetry">if you have found it, you have a future, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your hope will not be cut off. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:15</span> Do not lie in wait like the wicked against the place where the righteous live;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not assault his home. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:16</span> Indeed a righteous person will fall seven times, and then get up again,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the guilty will collapse in calamity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:17</span> Do not rejoice when your enemy falls, </p>
<p class="poetry">and when he stumbles do not let your heart rejoice, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:18</span> lest the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> see it, and be displeased, </p>
<p class="poetry">and turn his wrath away from him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:19</span> Do not fret because of evil people</p>
<p class="poetry">or be envious of wicked people,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:20</span> for the evil person has no future, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:21</span> Fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my child, as well as the king,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not associate with rebels, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:22</span> for suddenly their destruction will overtake them, </p>
<p class="poetry">and who knows the ruinous judgment both the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and the king can bring? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Further Sayings of the Wise</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:23</span> These sayings also are from the wise:</p>
<p class="poetry">To show partiality in judgment is terrible: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:24</span> The one who says to the guilty, “You are innocent,” </p>
<p class="poetry">peoples will curse him, and nations will denounce him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:25</span> But there will be delight for those who convict the guilty, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a pleasing blessing will come on them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:26</span> Like a kiss on the lips </p>
<p class="poetry">is the one who gives an honest answer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:27</span> Establish your work outside and get your fields ready;</p>
<p class="poetry">afterward build your house. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:28</span> Do not be a witness against your neighbor without cause, </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not deceive with your words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:29</span> Do not say, “I will do to him just as he has done to me;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will pay him back according to what he has done.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:30</span> I passed by the field of a sluggard,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the vineyard of one who lacks sense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:31</span> I saw that thorns had grown up all over it, </p>
<p class="poetry">the ground was covered with weeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">and its stone wall was broken down. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:32</span> Then I scrutinized it. I was putting my mind to it—</p>
<p class="poetry">I saw; I took in a lesson: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:33</span> “A little sleep, a little slumber,</p>
<p class="poetry">a little folding of the hands to relax, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:34</span> and your poverty will come like a bandit,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your need like an armed robber.” </p>

</body>
</html>