<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Judges 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Judges<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Six Hundred Brides for Six Hundred Brothers</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:1</span> The Israelites had taken an oath in Mizpah, saying, “Not one of us will allow his daughter to marry a Benjaminite.” <span class="verse">21:2</span> So the people came to Bethel and sat there before God until evening, weeping loudly and uncontrollably. <span class="verse">21:3</span> They said, “Why, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel, has this happened in Israel? An entire tribe has disappeared from Israel today!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:4</span> The next morning the people got up early and built an altar there. They offered up burnt sacrifices and tokens of peace. <span class="verse">21:5</span> The Israelites asked, “Who from all the Israelite tribes has not assembled before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?”They had made a solemn oath that whoever did not assemble before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at Mizpah must certainly be executed. <span class="verse">21:6</span> The Israelites regretted what had happened to their brother Benjamin. They said, “Today we cut off an entire tribe from Israel! <span class="verse">21:7</span> How can we find wives for those who are left? After all, we took an oath in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s name not to give them our daughters as wives.” <span class="verse">21:8</span> So they asked, “Who from all the Israelite tribes did not assemble before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at Mizpah?” Now it just so happened no one from Jabesh Gilead had come to the gathering. <span class="verse">21:9</span> When they took roll call, they noticed none of the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead were there. <span class="verse">21:10</span> So the assembly sent 12,000 capable warriors against Jabesh Gilead. They commanded them, “Go and kill with your swords the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead, including the women and little children. <span class="verse">21:11</span> Do this: Exterminate every male, as well as every woman who has experienced a man’s bed. But spare the lives of any virgins.” So they did as instructed. <span class="verse">21:12</span> They found among the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead 400 young girls who were virgins who had never been intimate with a man in bed. They brought them back to the camp at Shiloh in the land of Canaan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:13</span> The entire assembly sent messengers to the Benjaminites at the cliff of Rimmon and assured them they would not be harmed. <span class="verse">21:14</span> The Benjaminites returned at that time, and the Israelites gave to them the women they had spared from Jabesh Gilead. But there were not enough to go around. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:15</span> The people regretted what had happened to Benjamin because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had weakened the Israelite tribes. <span class="verse">21:16</span> The leaders of the assembly said, “How can we find wives for those who are left? After all, the Benjaminite women have been wiped out. <span class="verse">21:17</span> The remnant of Benjamin must be preserved. An entire Israelite tribe should not be wiped out. <span class="verse">21:18</span> But we can’t allow our daughters to marry them, for the Israelites took an oath, saying, ‘Whoever gives a woman to a Benjaminite will be destroyed.’ <span class="verse">21:19</span> However, there is an annual festival to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in Shiloh, which is north of Bethel (east of the main road that goes up from Bethel to Shechem) and south of Lebonah.” <span class="verse">21:20</span> So they commanded the Benjaminites, “Go hide in the vineyards, <span class="verse">21:21</span> and keep your eyes open. When you see the daughters of Shiloh coming out to dance in the celebration, jump out from the vineyards. Each one of you, catch yourself a wife from among the daughters of Shiloh and then go home to the land of Benjamin. <span class="verse">21:22</span> When their fathers or brothers come and protest to us, we’ll say to them, ‘Do us a favor and let them be, for we could not get each one a wife through battle. Don’t worry about breaking your oath! You would only be guilty if you had voluntarily given them wives.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:23</span> The Benjaminites did as instructed. They abducted 200 of the dancing girls to be their wives. They went home to their own territory, rebuilt their cities, and settled down. <span class="verse">21:24</span> Then the Israelites dispersed from there to their respective tribal and clan territories. Each went from there to his own property. <span class="verse">21:25</span> In those days Israel had no king. Each man did what he considered to be right. </p>

</body>
</html>