<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Asa’s Failures</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:19</span> There was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa’s reign. <span class="verse">16:1</span> In the thirty-sixth year of Asa’s reign, King Baasha of Israel attacked Judah, and he established Ramah as a military outpost to prevent anyone from leaving or entering the land of King Asa of Judah. <span class="verse">16:2</span> Asa took all the silver and gold that was left in the treasuries of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and of the royal palace and sent it to King Ben Hadad of Syria, ruler in Damascus, along with this message: <span class="verse">16:3</span> “I want to make a treaty with you, like the one our fathers made. See, I have sent you silver and gold. Break your treaty with King Baasha of Israel, so he will retreat from my land.” <span class="verse">16:4</span> Ben Hadad accepted King Asa’s offer and ordered his army commanders to attack the cities of Israel. They conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel Maim, and all the storage cities of Naphtali. <span class="verse">16:5</span> When Baasha heard the news, he stopped fortifying Ramah and abandoned the project. <span class="verse">16:6</span> King Asa ordered all the men of Judah to carry away the stones and wood that Baasha had used to build Ramah. He used the materials to build up Geba and Mizpah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:7</span> At that time Hanani the prophet visited King Asa of Judah and said to him: “Because you relied on the king of Syria and did not rely on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, the army of the king of Syria has escaped from your hand. <span class="verse">16:8</span> Did not the Cushites and Libyans have a huge army with chariots and a very large number of horsemen? But when you relied on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, he handed them over to you! <span class="verse">16:9</span> Certainly the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> watches the whole earth carefully and is ready to strengthen those who are devoted to him. You have acted foolishly in this matter; from now on you will have war.” <span class="verse">16:10</span> Asa was so angry at the prophet, he put him in jail. Asa also oppressed some of the people at that time. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Asa’s Reign Ends</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:11</span> The events of Asa’s reign, from start to finish, are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Judah and Israel. <span class="verse">16:12</span> In the thirty-ninth year of his reign, Asa developed a foot disease and his disease became severe. Yet even in his disease, he did not seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, but only the doctors. <span class="verse">16:13</span> Asa passed away in the forty-first year of his reign. <span class="verse">16:14</span> He was buried in the tomb he had carved out in the City of David. They laid him to rest on a platform covered with spices and assorted mixtures of ointments. They made a huge bonfire to honor him. </p>

</body>
</html>