<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Judges 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Judges<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Micah Makes His Own Religion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> There was a man named Micah from the Ephraimite hill country. <span class="verse">17:2</span> He said to his mother, “You know the 1,100 pieces of silver which were stolen from you, about which I heard you pronounce a curse? Look here, I have the silver. I stole it, but now I am giving it back to you.” His mother said, “May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> reward you, my son!” <span class="verse">17:3</span> When he gave back to his mother the 1,100 pieces of silver, his mother said, “I solemnly dedicate this silver to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. It will be for my son’s benefit. We will use it to make a carved image and a metal image.” <span class="verse">17:4</span> When he gave the silver back to his mother, she took 200 pieces of silver to a silversmith, who made them into a carved image and a metal image. She then put them in Micah’s house. <span class="verse">17:5</span> Now this man Micah owned a shrine. He made an ephod and some personal idols and hired one of his sons to serve as a priest. <span class="verse">17:6</span> In those days Israel had no king. Each man did what he considered to be right. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Micah Hires a Professional</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:7</span> There was a young man from Bethlehem in Judah. He was a Levite who had been temporarily residing among the tribe of Judah. <span class="verse">17:8</span> This man left the town of Bethlehem in Judah to find another place to live. He came to the Ephraimite hill country and made his way to Micah’s house. <span class="verse">17:9</span> Micah said to him, “Where do you come from?” He replied, “I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah. I am looking for a new place to live.” <span class="verse">17:10</span> Micah said to him, “Stay with me. Become my adviser and priest. I will give you ten pieces of silver per year, plus clothes and food.” <span class="verse">17:11</span> So the Levite agreed to stay with the man; the young man was like a son to Micah. <span class="verse">17:12</span> Micah paid the Levite; the young man became his priest and lived in Micah’s house. <span class="verse">17:13</span> Micah said, “Now I know the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will make me rich, because I have this Levite as my priest.” </p>

</body>
</html>