<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Matthew 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Wedding Banquet </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:1</span> Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying: <span class="verse">22:2</span> “The kingdom of heaven can be compared to a king who gave a wedding banquet for his son. <span class="verse">22:3</span> He sent his slaves to summon those who had been invited to the banquet, but they would not come. <span class="verse">22:4</span> Again he sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those who have been invited, “Look! The feast I have prepared for you is ready. My oxen and fattened cattle have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding banquet.”’ <span class="verse">22:5</span> But they were indifferent and went away, one to his farm, another to his business. <span class="verse">22:6</span> The rest seized his slaves, insolently mistreated them, and killed them. <span class="verse">22:7</span> The king was furious! He sent his soldiers, and they put those murderers to death and set their city on fire. <span class="verse">22:8</span> Then he said to his slaves, ‘The wedding is ready, but the ones who had been invited were not worthy. <span class="verse">22:9</span> So go into the main streets and invite everyone you find to the wedding banquet.’ <span class="verse">22:10</span> And those slaves went out into the streets and gathered all they found, both bad and good, and the wedding hall was filled with guests. <span class="verse">22:11</span> But when the king came in to see the wedding guests, he saw a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes. <span class="verse">22:12</span> And he said to him, ‘Friend, how did you get in here without wedding clothes?’ But he had nothing to say. <span class="verse">22:13</span> Then the king said to his attendants, ‘Tie him up hand and foot and throw him into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth!’ <span class="verse">22:14</span> For many are called, but few are chosen.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paying Taxes to Caesar </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:15</span> Then the Pharisees went out and planned together to entrap him with his own words. <span class="verse">22:16</span> They sent to him their disciples along with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that you are truthful, and teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. You do not court anyone’s favor because you show no partiality. <span class="verse">22:17</span> Tell us then, what do you think? Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:18</span> But Jesus realized their evil intentions and said, “Hypocrites! Why are you testing me? <span class="verse">22:19</span> Show me the coin used for the tax.” So they brought him a denarius. <span class="verse">22:20</span> Jesus said to them, “Whose image is this, and whose inscription?” <span class="verse">22:21</span> They replied, “Caesar’s.” He said to them, “Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” <span class="verse">22:22</span> Now when they heard this they were stunned, and they left him and went away. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Marriage and the Resurrection</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:23</span> The same day Sadducees (who say there is no resurrection) came to him and asked him, <span class="verse">22:24</span> “Teacher, Moses said, ‘<b><i>If a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and father children</i></b> <b><i>for his brother</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">22:25</span> Now there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died, and since he had no children he left his wife to his brother. <span class="verse">22:26</span> The second did the same, and the third, down to the seventh. <span class="verse">22:27</span> Last of all, the woman died. <span class="verse">22:28</span> In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife of the seven will she be? For they all had married her.” <span class="verse">22:29</span> Jesus answered them, “You are deceived, because you don’t know the scriptures or the power of God. <span class="verse">22:30</span> For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. <span class="verse">22:31</span> Now as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God, <span class="verse">22:32</span> ‘<b><i>I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob</i></b>’? He is not the God of the dead but of the living!” <span class="verse">22:33</span> When the crowds heard this, they were amazed at his teaching. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Greatest Commandment </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:34</span> Now when the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they assembled together. <span class="verse">22:35</span> And one of them, an expert in religious law, asked him a question to test him: <span class="verse">22:36</span> “Teacher, which commandment in the law is the greatest?” <span class="verse">22:37</span> Jesus said to him, “‘<b><i>Love</i></b> <b><i>the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">22:38</span> This is the first and greatest commandment. <span class="verse">22:39</span> The second is like it: ‘<b><i>Love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">22:40</span> All the law and the prophets depend on these two commandments.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Messiah: David’s Son and Lord </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:41</span> While the Pharisees were assembled, Jesus asked them a question: <span class="verse">22:42</span> “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said, “The son of David.” <span class="verse">22:43</span> He said to them, “How then does David by the Spirit call him ‘Lord,’ saying, </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">22:44</span> ‘<b><i>The Lord said to my lord,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<b><i>Sit at my right hand,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>until I put your enemies under your feet</i></b>”’? </p>
<p class="bodyblock"><span class="verse">22:45</span> If David then calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?” <span class="verse">22:46</span> No one was able to answer him a word, and from that day on no one dared to question him any longer. </p>

</body>
</html>