<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Matthew 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Breaking Human Traditions</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> Then Pharisees and experts in the law came from Jerusalem to Jesus and said, <span class="verse">15:2</span> “Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders? For they don’t wash their hands when they eat.” <span class="verse">15:3</span> He answered them, “And why do you disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition? <span class="verse">15:4</span> For God said, ‘<b><i>Honor your father and mother</i></b>’ and ‘<b><i>Whoever insults his father or mother must be put to death</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">15:5</span> But you say, ‘If someone tells his father or mother, “Whatever help you would have received from me is given to God,” <span class="verse">15:6</span> he does not need to honor his father.’ You have nullified the word of God on account of your tradition. <span class="verse">15:7</span> Hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied correctly about you when he said, </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">15:8</span> ‘<b><i>This people honors me with their lips,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>but their heart</i></b> <b><i>is far from me,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">15:9</span> <b><i>and they worship me in vain,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>teaching as doctrines the commandments of men</b></i>.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">True Defilement</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:10</span> Then he called the crowd to him and said, “Listen and understand. <span class="verse">15:11</span> What defiles a person is not what goes into the mouth; it is what comes out of the mouth that defiles a person.” <span class="verse">15:12</span> Then the disciples came to him and said, “Do you know that when the Pharisees heard this saying they were offended?” <span class="verse">15:13</span> And he replied, “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted. <span class="verse">15:14</span> Leave them! They are blind guides. If someone who is blind leads another who is blind, both will fall into a pit.” <span class="verse">15:15</span> But Peter said to him, “Explain this parable to us.” <span class="verse">15:16</span> Jesus said, “Even after all this, are you still so foolish? <span class="verse">15:17</span> Don’t you understand that whatever goes into the mouth enters the stomach and then passes out into the sewer? <span class="verse">15:18</span> But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and these things defile a person. <span class="verse">15:19</span> For out of the heart come evil ideas, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander. <span class="verse">15:20</span> These are the things that defile a person; it is not eating with unwashed hands that defiles a person.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Canaanite Woman’s Faith</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:21</span> After going out from there, Jesus went to the region of Tyre and Sidon. <span class="verse">15:22</span> A Canaanite woman from that area came and cried out, “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is horribly demon-possessed!” <span class="verse">15:23</span> But he did not answer her a word. Then his disciples came and begged him, “Send her away, because she keeps on crying out after us.” <span class="verse">15:24</span> So he answered, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” <span class="verse">15:25</span> But she came and bowed down before him and said, “Lord, help me!” <span class="verse">15:26</span> “It is not right to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs,” he said. <span class="verse">15:27</span> “Yes, Lord,” she replied, “but even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table.” <span class="verse">15:28</span> Then Jesus answered her, “Woman, your faith is great! Let what you want be done for you.” And her daughter was healed from that hour. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing Many Others </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:29</span> When he left there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee. Then he went up a mountain, where he sat down. <span class="verse">15:30</span> Then large crowds came to him bringing with them the lame, blind, crippled, mute, and many others. They laid them at his feet, and he healed them. <span class="verse">15:31</span> As a result, the crowd was amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled healthy, the lame walking, and the blind seeing, and they praised the God of Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feeding of the Four Thousand</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:32</span> Then Jesus called his disciples and said, “I have compassion on the crowd, because they have already been here with me three days and they have nothing to eat. I don’t want to send them away hungry since they may faint on the way.” <span class="verse">15:33</span> The disciples said to him, “Where can we get enough bread in this desolate place to satisfy so great a crowd?” <span class="verse">15:34</span> Jesus said to them, “How many loaves do you have?” They replied, “Seven—and a few small fish.” <span class="verse">15:35</span> After instructing the crowd to sit down on the ground, <span class="verse">15:36</span> he took the seven loaves and the fish, and after giving thanks, he broke them and began giving them to the disciples, who then gave them to the crowds. <span class="verse">15:37</span> They all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full. <span class="verse">15:38</span> Not counting children and women, there were 4,000 men who ate. <span class="verse">15:39</span> After sending away the crowd, he got into the boat and went to the region of Magadan. </p>

</body>
</html>