<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Samuel 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Samuel<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Sings to the Lord</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:1</span>  David sang to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> the words of this song when the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rescued him from the power of all his enemies, including Saul. <span class="verse">22:2</span> He said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is my high ridge, my stronghold, my deliverer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:3</span> My God is my rocky summit where I take shelter, </p>
<p class="poetry">my shield, the horn that saves me, my stronghold,</p>
<p class="poetry">my refuge, my savior. You save me from violence! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:4</span> I called to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who is worthy of praise, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I was delivered from my enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:5</span> The waves of death engulfed me;</p>
<p class="poetry">the currents of chaos overwhelmed me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:6</span> The ropes of Sheol tightened around me; </p>
<p class="poetry">the snares of death trapped me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:7</span> In my distress I called to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">I called to my God. </p>
<p class="poetry">From his heavenly temple he heard my voice;</p>
<p class="poetry">he listened to my cry for help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:8</span> The earth heaved and shook; </p>
<p class="poetry">the foundations of the sky trembled. </p>
<p class="poetry">They heaved because he was angry. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:9</span> Smoke ascended from his nose; </p>
<p class="poetry">fire devoured as it came from his mouth; </p>
<p class="poetry">he hurled down fiery coals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:10</span> He made the sky sink as he descended;</p>
<p class="poetry">a thick cloud was under his feet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:11</span> He mounted a winged angel and flew;</p>
<p class="poetry">he glided on the wings of the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:12</span> He shrouded himself in darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">in thick rain clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:13</span> From the brightness in front of him </p>
<p class="poetry">came coals of fire. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> thundered from the sky;</p>
<p class="poetry">the Most High shouted loudly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:15</span> He shot arrows and scattered them, </p>
<p class="poetry">lightning and routed them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:16</span> The depths of the sea were exposed;</p>
<p class="poetry">the inner regions of the world were uncovered</p>
<p class="poetry">by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s battle cry, </p>
<p class="poetry">by the powerful breath from his nose. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:17</span> He reached down from above and grabbed me; </p>
<p class="poetry">he pulled me from the surging water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:18</span> He rescued me from my strong enemy, </p>
<p class="poetry">from those who hate me, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they were too strong for me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:19</span> They confronted me in my day of calamity,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> helped me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:20</span> He brought me out into a wide open place;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivered me because he was pleased with me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:21</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> repaid me for my godly deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">he rewarded my blameless behavior. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:22</span> For I have obeyed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s commands; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have not rebelled against my God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:23</span> For I am aware of all his regulations, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I do not reject his rules. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:24</span> I was blameless before him;</p>
<p class="poetry">I kept myself from sinning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:25</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rewarded me for my godly deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">he took notice of my blameless behavior. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:26</span> You prove to be loyal to one who is faithful; </p>
<p class="poetry">you prove to be trustworthy to one who is innocent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:27</span> You prove to be reliable to one who is blameless,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you prove to be deceptive to one who is perverse. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:28</span> You deliver oppressed people,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you watch<sup></sup> the proud and bring them down. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:29</span> Indeed, you are my lamp, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> illumines the darkness around me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:30</span> Indeed, with your help I can charge against an army; </p>
<p class="poetry">by my God’s power I can jump over a wall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:31</span> The one true God acts in a faithful manner; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s promise is reliable; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is a shield to all who take shelter in him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:32</span> Indeed, who is God besides the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who is a protector besides our God? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:33</span> The one true God is my mighty refuge; </p>
<p class="poetry">he removes the obstacles in my way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:34</span> He gives me the agility of a deer; </p>
<p class="poetry">he enables me to negotiate the rugged terrain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:35</span> He trains my hands for battle; </p>
<p class="poetry">my arms can bend even the strongest bow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:36</span> You give me your protective shield; </p>
<p class="poetry">your willingness to help enables me to prevail. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:37</span> You widen my path; </p>
<p class="poetry">my feet do not slip. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:38</span> I chase my enemies and destroy them;</p>
<p class="poetry">I do not turn back until I wipe them out.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:39</span> I wipe them out and beat them to death;</p>
<p class="poetry">they cannot get up;</p>
<p class="poetry">they fall at my feet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:40</span> You give me strength for battle; </p>
<p class="poetry">you make my foes kneel before me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:41</span> You make my enemies retreat; </p>
<p class="poetry">I destroy those who hate me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:42</span> They cry out, but there is no one to help them; </p>
<p class="poetry">they cry out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, but he does not answer them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:43</span> I grind them as fine as the dust of the ground;</p>
<p class="poetry">I crush them and stomp them like clay in the streets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:44</span> You rescue me from a hostile army; </p>
<p class="poetry">you preserve me as a leader of nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">people over whom I had no authority are now my subjects. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:45</span> Foreigners are powerless before me; </p>
<p class="poetry">when they hear of my exploits, they submit to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:46</span> Foreigners lose their courage; </p>
<p class="poetry">they shake with fear as they leave their strongholds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:47</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is alive! </p>
<p class="poetry">My Protector is praiseworthy! </p>
<p class="poetry">The God who delivers me is exalted as king! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:48</span> The one true God completely vindicates me; </p>
<p class="poetry">he makes nations submit to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:49</span> He delivers me from my enemies; </p>
<p class="poetry">you snatch me away from those who attack me; </p>
<p class="poetry">you rescue me from violent men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:50</span> So I will give you thanks, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, before the nations! </p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:51</span> He gives his king magnificent victories; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is faithful to his chosen ruler, </p>
<p class="poetry">to David and to his descendants forever!” </p>

</body>
</html>