<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 7</h2><p class="psasuper">A musical composition by David, which he sang to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> concerning a Benjaminite named Cush. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God, in you I have taken shelter. </p>
<p class="poetry">Deliver me from all who chase me. Rescue me!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:2</span> Otherwise they will rip me to shreds like a lion;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will tear me to bits and no one will be able to rescue me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:3</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God, if I have done what they say, </p>
<p class="poetry">or am guilty of unjust actions, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:4</span> or have wronged my ally, </p>
<p class="poetry">or helped his lawless enemy, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:5</span> may an enemy relentlessly chase me and catch me; </p>
<p class="poetry">may he trample me to death </p>
<p class="poetry">and leave me lying dishonored in the dust. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:6</span> Stand up angrily, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Rise up with raging fury against my enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry">Wake up for my sake, and execute the judgment you have decreed for them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> The countries are assembled all around you; </p>
<p class="poetry">take once more your rightful place over them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> judges the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry">Vindicate me, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, because I am innocent, </p>
<p class="poetry">because I am blameless, O Exalted One. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> May the evil deeds of the wicked come to an end. </p>
<p class="poetry">But make the innocent secure, </p>
<p class="poetry">O righteous God,</p>
<p class="poetry">you who examine inner thoughts and motives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:10</span> The Exalted God is my shield, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who delivers the morally upright. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:11</span> God is a just judge;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is angry throughout the day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:12</span> If a person does not repent, God will wield his sword. </p>
<p class="poetry">He has prepared to shoot his bow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:13</span> He has prepared deadly weapons to use against him; </p>
<p class="poetry">he gets ready to shoot flaming arrows. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:14</span> See the one who is pregnant with wickedness,</p>
<p class="poetry">who conceives destructive plans,</p>
<p class="poetry">and gives birth to harmful lies—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:15</span> he digs a pit </p>
<p class="poetry">and then falls into the hole he has made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:16</span> He becomes the victim of his own destructive plans — </p>
<p class="poetry">and the violence he intended for others falls on his own head. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:17</span> I will thank the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for his justice;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> Most High! </p>

</body>
</html>