<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joel 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joel<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> Plans to Judge the Nations</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> (4:1) For look! In those days and at that time</p>
<p class="poetry">I will return the exiles to Judah and Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> Then I will gather all the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">and bring them down to the Valley of Jehoshaphat. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will enter into judgment against them there</p>
<p class="poetry">concerning my people Israel who are my inheritance, </p>
<p class="poetry">whom they scattered among the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">They partitioned my land, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> and they cast lots for my people.</p>
<p class="poetry">They traded a boy for a prostitute;</p>
<p class="poetry">they sold a little girl for wine so they could drink. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> Why are you doing these things to me, Tyre and Sidon? </p>
<p class="poetry">Are you trying to get even with me, land of Philistia? </p>
<p class="poetry">If you are, I will very quickly repay you for what you have done! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> For you took my silver and my gold</p>
<p class="poetry">and brought my precious valuables to your own palaces. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> You sold Judeans and Jerusalemites to the Greeks,</p>
<p class="poetry">removing them far from their own country. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Look! I am rousing them from that place to which you sold them.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will repay you for what you have done! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> I will sell your sons and daughters to the people of Judah. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will sell them to the Sabeans, a nation far away.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judgment in the Valley of Jehoshaphat</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Proclaim this among the nations:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Prepare for a holy war!</p>
<p class="poetry">Call out the warriors!</p>
<p class="poetry">Let all these fighting men approach and attack! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> Beat your plowshares into swords,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your pruning hooks into spears. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let the weak say, ‘I too am a warrior!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> Lend your aid and come,</p>
<p class="poetry">all you surrounding nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">and gather yourselves to that place.”</p>
<p class="poetry">Bring down, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, your warriors! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> “Let the nations be roused and let them go up</p>
<p class="poetry">to the Valley of Jehoshaphat,</p>
<p class="poetry">for there I will sit in judgment on all the surrounding nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> Rush forth with the sickle, for the harvest is ripe!</p>
<p class="poetry">Come, stomp the grapes, for the winepress is full!</p>
<p class="poetry">The vats overflow.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, their evil is great!” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">3:14</span> Crowds, great crowds are in the Valley of Decision,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is near in the Valley of Decision! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> The sun and moon are darkened;</p>
<p class="poetry">the stars withhold their brightness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> roars from Zion;</p>
<p class="poetry">from Jerusalem his voice bellows out. </p>
<p class="poetry">The heavens and the earth shake.</p>
<p class="poetry">But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is a refuge for his people;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is a stronghold for the citizens of Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Presence in Zion</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> “You will be convinced that I the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> am your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">dwelling on Zion, my holy mountain.</p>
<p class="poetry">Jerusalem will be holy—</p>
<p class="poetry">conquering armies will no longer pass through it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> “On that day the mountains will drip with sweet wine, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the hills will flow with milk. </p>
<p class="poetry">All the dry stream beds of Judah will flow with water.</p>
<p class="poetry">A spring will flow out from the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">watering the Valley of Acacia Trees. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> Egypt will be desolate</p>
<p class="poetry">and Edom will be a desolate wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the violence they did to the people of Judah, </p>
<p class="poetry">in whose land they shed innocent blood. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:20</span> But Judah will reside securely forever,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Jerusalem will be secure from one generation to the next.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:21</span> I will avenge their blood that I had not previously acquitted.</p>
<p class="poetry">It is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who dwells in Zion! </p>

</body>
</html>