<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Micah 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Micah<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Better Days Ahead for Jerusalem</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:1</span> And in future days the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s Temple Mount will be the most important mountain of all; </p>
<p class="poetry">it will be more prominent than other hills. </p>
<p class="poetry">People will stream to it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> Many nations will come, saying,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Come on! Let’s go up to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s mountain,</p>
<p class="poetry">to the temple of Jacob’s God,</p>
<p class="poetry">so he can teach us his ways</p>
<p class="poetry">and we can live by his laws.” </p>
<p class="poetry">For instruction will proceed from Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message from Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> He will arbitrate between many peoples</p>
<p class="poetry">and settle disputes between many distant nations. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will beat their swords into plowshares, </p>
<p class="poetry">and their spears into pruning hooks. </p>
<p class="poetry">Nations will not use weapons against other nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they will no longer train for war. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Each will sit under his own grapevine</p>
<p class="poetry">or under his own fig tree without any fear. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has decreed it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> Though all the nations follow their respective gods, </p>
<p class="poetry">we will follow the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God forever. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Restoration Will Follow Crisis</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:6</span> “In that day,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “I will gather the lame</p>
<p class="poetry">and assemble the outcasts whom I injured. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> I will transform the lame into the nucleus of a new nation, </p>
<p class="poetry">and those far off into a mighty nation.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will reign over them on Mount Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">from that day forward and forevermore. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> As for you, watchtower for the flock, </p>
<p class="poetry">fortress of Daughter Zion —</p>
<p class="poetry">your former dominion will be restored, </p>
<p class="poetry">the sovereignty that belongs to Daughter Jerusalem.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:9</span> Jerusalem, why are you now shouting so loudly? </p>
<p class="poetry">Has your king disappeared? </p>
<p class="poetry">Has your wise leader been destroyed?</p>
<p class="poetry">Is this why pain grips you as if you were a woman in labor? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:10</span> Twist and strain, Daughter Zion, as if you were in labor!</p>
<p class="poetry">For you will leave the city</p>
<p class="poetry">and live in the open field.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will go to Babylon,</p>
<p class="poetry">but there you will be rescued.</p>
<p class="poetry">There the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will deliver you</p>
<p class="poetry">from the power of your enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Many nations have now assembled against you.</p>
<p class="poetry">They say, “Jerusalem must be desecrated, </p>
<p class="poetry">so we can gloat over Zion!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> But they do not know what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is planning;</p>
<p class="poetry">they do not understand his strategy.</p>
<p class="poetry">He has gathered them like stalks of grain to be threshed at the threshing floor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:13</span> “Get up and thresh, Daughter Zion!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I will give you iron horns; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will give you bronze hooves,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you will crush many nations.” </p>
<p class="poetry">You will devote to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> the spoils you take from them</p>
<p class="poetry">and dedicate their wealth to the sovereign Ruler of the whole earth. </p>

</body>
</html>