<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:1</span> The king’s heart is in the hand of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> like channels of water; </p>
<p class="poetry">he turns it wherever he wants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:2</span> All a person’s ways seem right in his own opinion, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> evaluates his thoughts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:3</span> To do righteousness and justice</p>
<p class="poetry">is more acceptable to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> than sacrifice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:4</span> Haughty eyes and a proud heart—</p>
<p class="poetry">what the wicked cultivate is sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:5</span> The plans of the diligent lead only to plenty, </p>
<p class="poetry">but everyone who is hasty comes only to poverty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:6</span> Making a fortune by a lying tongue is like a vapor driven back and forth; </p>
<p class="poetry">they seek death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:7</span> The violence done by the wicked will drag them away</p>
<p class="poetry">because they have refused to do what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:8</span> The way of the guilty person is devious, </p>
<p class="poetry">but as for the pure, his way is upright. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:9</span> It is better to live on a corner of the housetop </p>
<p class="poetry">than to share a house with a quarrelsome wife. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:10</span> The appetite of the wicked has desired evil;</p>
<p class="poetry">his neighbor is shown no favor in his eyes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:11</span> When a scorner is punished, the naive becomes wise;</p>
<p class="poetry">when a wise person is instructed, he gains knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:12</span> The Righteous One considers the house of the wicked;</p>
<p class="poetry">he overthrows the wicked to their ruin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:13</span> The one who shuts his ears to the cry of the poor,</p>
<p class="poetry">he too will cry out and will not be answered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:14</span> A gift given in secret subdues anger,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a bribe given secretly subdues strong wrath. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:15</span> Doing justice brings joy to the righteous</p>
<p class="poetry">and terror to those who do evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:16</span> The one who wanders from the way of wisdom </p>
<p class="poetry">will end up in the company of the departed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:17</span> The one who loves pleasure will be a poor person; </p>
<p class="poetry">whoever loves wine and anointing oil will not be rich. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:18</span> The wicked become a ransom for the righteous,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the treacherous are taken in the place of the upright. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:19</span> It is better to live in the wilderness </p>
<p class="poetry">than with a quarrelsome and easily provoked woman. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:20</span> There is desirable treasure and olive oil in the dwelling of the wise,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a foolish person devours all he has. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:21</span> The one who pursues righteousness and love </p>
<p class="poetry">finds life, bounty, and honor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:22</span> A wise man went up against the city of the mighty</p>
<p class="poetry">and brought down the stronghold in which they trust. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:23</span> The one who guards his mouth and his tongue </p>
<p class="poetry">keeps his life from troubles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:24</span> A proud and arrogant person, whose name is “Scoffer,” </p>
<p class="poetry">acts with overbearing pride. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:25</span> What the sluggard desires will kill him, </p>
<p class="poetry">for his hands have refused to work.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:26</span> All day long he has craved greedily, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the righteous person gives and does not hold back. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:27</span> The wicked person’s sacrifice is an abomination;</p>
<p class="poetry">how much more when he brings it with evil intent! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:28</span> A lying witness will perish, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who reports accurately speaks forever. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:29</span> A wicked person has put on a bold face, </p>
<p class="poetry">but as for the upright, he establishes his ways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:30</span> There is no wisdom and there is no understanding,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there is no counsel against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:31</span> A horse is prepared for the day of battle,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the victory is from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>