<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Brevity of Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:1</span> “Does not humanity have hard service on earth?</p>
<p class="poetry">Are not their days also like the days of a hired man? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:2</span> Like a servant longing for the evening shadow, </p>
<p class="poetry">and like a hired man looking for his wages, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:3</span> thus I have been made to inherit </p>
<p class="poetry">months of futility, </p>
<p class="poetry">and nights of sorrow </p>
<p class="poetry">have been appointed to me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:4</span> If I lie down, I say, ‘When will I arise?’</p>
<p class="poetry">And the night stretches on </p>
<p class="poetry">and I toss and turn restlessly </p>
<p class="poetry">until the day dawns. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:5</span> My body is clothed with worms and dirty scabs; </p>
<p class="poetry">my skin is broken and festering. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:6</span> My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle </p>
<p class="poetry">and they come to an end without hope. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> Remember that my life is but a breath,</p>
<p class="poetry">that my eyes will never again see happiness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:8</span> The eye of him who sees me now will see me no more; </p>
<p class="poetry">your eyes will look for me, but I will be gone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> As a cloud is dispersed and then disappears, </p>
<p class="poetry">so the one who goes down to the grave </p>
<p class="poetry">does not come up again. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:10</span> He returns no more to his house,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor does his place of residence know him anymore. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job Remonstrates with God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:11</span> “Therefore, I will not refrain my mouth; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will speak in the anguish of my spirit;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:12</span> Am I the sea, or the creature of the deep, </p>
<p class="poetry">that you must put me under guard? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:13</span> If I say, ‘My bed will comfort me, </p>
<p class="poetry">my couch will ease my complaint,’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:14</span> then you scare me with dreams</p>
<p class="poetry">and terrify me with visions, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:15</span> so that I would prefer strangling, </p>
<p class="poetry">and death more than life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:16</span> I loathe it; I do not want to live forever;</p>
<p class="poetry">leave me alone, for my days are a vapor! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Insignificance of Humans</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:17</span> “What is mankind that you make so much of them, </p>
<p class="poetry">and that you pay attention to them? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:18</span> And that you visit them every morning,</p>
<p class="poetry">and try them every moment? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:19</span> Will you never look away from me, </p>
<p class="poetry">will you not let me alone </p>
<p class="poetry">long enough to swallow my spittle? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:20</span> If I have sinned—what have I done to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">O watcher of men? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why have you set me as your target? </p>
<p class="poetry">Have I become a burden to you? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:21</span> And why do you not pardon my transgression,</p>
<p class="poetry">and take away my iniquity?</p>
<p class="poetry">For now I will lie down in the dust, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will seek me diligently, </p>
<p class="poetry">but I will be gone.” </p>

</body>
</html>