<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Apparent Indifference of God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:1</span> “Why are times not appointed by the Almighty? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why do those who know him not see his days? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:2</span> Men move boundary stones;</p>
<p class="poetry">they seize the flock and pasture them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:3</span> They drive away the orphan’s donkey;</p>
<p class="poetry">they take the widow’s ox as a pledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:4</span> They turn the needy from the pathway,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the poor of the land hide themselves together. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:5</span> Like wild donkeys in the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">they go out to their labor seeking diligently for food;</p>
<p class="poetry">the arid rift valley provides food for them and for their children. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:6</span> They reap fodder in the field,</p>
<p class="poetry">and glean in the vineyard of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:7</span> They spend the night naked because they lack clothing;</p>
<p class="poetry">they have no covering against the cold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:8</span> They are soaked by mountain rains</p>
<p class="poetry">and huddle in the rocks because they lack shelter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:9</span> The fatherless child is snatched from the breast, </p>
<p class="poetry">the infant of the poor is taken as a pledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:10</span> They go about naked, without clothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">and go hungry while they carry the sheaves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:11</span> They press out the olive oil between the rows of olive trees; </p>
<p class="poetry">they tread the winepresses while they are thirsty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:12</span> From the city the dying groan,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the wounded cry out for help,</p>
<p class="poetry">but God charges no one with wrongdoing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:13</span> There are those who rebel against the light;</p>
<p class="poetry">they do not know its ways </p>
<p class="poetry">and they do not stay on its paths. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:14</span> Before daybreak the murderer rises up;</p>
<p class="poetry">he kills the poor and the needy;</p>
<p class="poetry">in the night he is like a thief. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:15</span> And the eye of the adulterer watches for the twilight,</p>
<p class="poetry">thinking, ‘No eye can see me,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and covers his face with a mask. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:16</span> In the dark the robber breaks into houses, </p>
<p class="poetry">but by day they shut themselves in; </p>
<p class="poetry">they do not know the light. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:17</span> For all of them, the morning is to them like deep darkness;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are friends with the terrors of darkness. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">24:18</span>  “You say, ‘He is foam on the face of the waters; </p>
<p class="poetry">their portion of the land is cursed</p>
<p class="poetry">so that no one goes to their vineyard. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:19</span> The drought as well as the heat</p>
<p class="poetry">snatch up the melted snow; </p>
<p class="poetry">so the grave snatches up the sinner. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:20</span> The womb forgets him, </p>
<p class="poetry">the worm feasts on him,</p>
<p class="poetry">no longer will he be remembered.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a tree, wickedness will be broken down.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:21</span> He preys on the barren and childless woman, </p>
<p class="poetry">and does not treat the widow well. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:22</span> But God drags off the mighty by his power;</p>
<p class="poetry">when God rises up against him, he has no faith in his life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:23</span> God may let them rest in a feeling of security, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he is constantly watching all their ways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:24</span> They are exalted for a little while, and then they are gone, </p>
<p class="poetry">they are brought low like all others, and gathered in, </p>
<p class="poetry">and like a head of grain they are cut off.’ </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">24:25</span> “If this is not so, who can prove me a liar</p>
<p class="poetry">and reduce my words to nothing?” </p>

</body>
</html>