<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Superficial Repentance Breeds False Assurance of God’s Forgiveness</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Come on! Let’s return to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">He himself has torn us to pieces, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he will heal us!</p>
<p class="poetry">He has injured us, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he will bandage our wounds! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:2</span> He will restore us in a very short time; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will heal us in a little while, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that we may live in his presence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:3</span> So let us search for him! </p>
<p class="poetry">Let us seek to know the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">He will come to our rescue as certainly as the appearance of the dawn,</p>
<p class="poetry">as certainly as the winter rain comes,</p>
<p class="poetry">as certainly as the spring rain that waters the land. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Transitory Faithfulness and Imminent Judgment</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:4</span> What am I going to do with you, O Ephraim?</p>
<p class="poetry">What am I going to do with you, O Judah?</p>
<p class="poetry">For your faithfulness is as fleeting as the morning mist; </p>
<p class="poetry">it disappears as quickly as dawn’s dew. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:5</span> Therefore, I will certainly cut you into pieces at the hands of the prophets; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will certainly kill you in fulfillment of my oracles of judgment, </p>
<p class="poetry">for my judgment will come forth like the light of the dawn. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:6</span> For I delight in faithfulness, not simply in sacrifice;</p>
<p class="poetry">I delight in acknowledging God, not simply in whole burnt offerings. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Indictments Against the Cities of Israel and Judah</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:7</span> At Adam they broke the covenant;</p>
<p class="poetry">Oh how they were unfaithful to me!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:8</span> Gilead is a city full of evildoers; </p>
<p class="poetry">its streets are stained with bloody footprints! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:9</span> The company of priests is like a gang of robbers,</p>
<p class="poetry">lying in ambush to pounce on a victim.</p>
<p class="poetry">They commit murder on the road to Shechem;</p>
<p class="poetry">they have done heinous crimes!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:10</span> I have seen a disgusting thing in the house of Israel:</p>
<p class="poetry">there Ephraim commits prostitution with other gods, </p>
<p class="poetry">and Israel defiles itself.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:11</span> I have appointed a time to reap judgment for you also, O Judah!</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">If Israel Would Repent of Sin, God Would Relent of Judgment</p><p class="poetry">Whenever I want to restore the fortunes of my people, </p>

</body>
</html>