<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 62</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 62</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Takes Delight in Zion</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:1</span> For the sake of Zion I will not be silent;</p>
<p class="poetry">for the sake of Jerusalem I will not be quiet,</p>
<p class="poetry">until her vindication shines brightly </p>
<p class="poetry">and her deliverance burns like a torch. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:2</span> Nations will see your vindication,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all kings your splendor.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will be called by a new name</p>
<p class="poetry">that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> himself will give you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:3</span> You will be a majestic crown in the hand of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">a royal turban in the hand of your God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:4</span> You will no longer be called, “Abandoned,”</p>
<p class="poetry">and your land will no longer be called “Desolate.”</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, you will be called “My Delight is in Her,” </p>
<p class="poetry">and your land “Married.” </p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will take delight in you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your land will be married to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:5</span> As a young man marries a young woman,</p>
<p class="poetry">so your sons will marry you.</p>
<p class="poetry">As a bridegroom rejoices over a bride,</p>
<p class="poetry">so your God will rejoice over you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:6</span> I post watchmen on your walls, O Jerusalem;</p>
<p class="poetry">they should keep praying all day and all night. </p>
<p class="poetry">You who pray to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, don’t be silent! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:7</span> Don’t allow him to rest until he reestablishes Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry">until he makes Jerusalem the pride of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> swears an oath by his right hand,</p>
<p class="poetry">by his strong arm: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will never again give your grain </p>
<p class="poetry">to your enemies as food,</p>
<p class="poetry">and foreigners will not drink your wine,</p>
<p class="poetry">which you worked hard to produce.</p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:9</span> But those who harvest the grain will eat it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who pick the grapes will drink the wine </p>
<p class="poetry">in the courts of my holy sanctuary.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:10</span> Come through! Come through the gates!</p>
<p class="poetry">Prepare the way for the people!</p>
<p class="poetry">Build it—Build the roadway!</p>
<p class="poetry">Remove the stones.</p>
<p class="poetry">Lift a signal flag for the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:11</span> Look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> announces to the entire earth: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Say to Daughter Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Look, your deliverer comes!</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, his reward is with him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his reward goes before him!’” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:12</span> They will be called, “The Holy People,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Ones Protected by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>
<p class="poetry">You will be called, “Sought After,</p>
<p class="poetry">City Not Abandoned.” </p>

</body>
</html>