<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Slaughter of Animals </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses, <span class="verse">17:2</span> “Speak to Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites, and tell them, ‘This is the word that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has commanded, <span class="verse">17:3</span> “Blood guilt will be accounted to any man from the house of Israel who slaughters an ox or a lamb or a goat inside the camp or outside the camp, <span class="verse">17:4</span> but has not brought it to the entrance of the Meeting Tent to present it as an offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> before the tabernacle of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. He has shed blood, so that man will be cut off from the midst of his people. <span class="verse">17:5</span> This is so that the Israelites will bring their sacrifices that they are sacrificing in the open field to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at the entrance of the Meeting Tent—to the priest—and sacrifice them there as peace-offering sacrifices to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">17:6</span> The priest is to splash the blood on the altar of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, and offer the fat up in smoke for a soothing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">17:7</span> So the people must no longer offer their sacrifices to the goat demons, acting like prostitutes by going after them. This is to be a perpetual statute for them throughout their generations.”’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:8</span> “You are to say to them: ‘Any man from the house of Israel or from the resident foreigners who live in their midst, who offers a burnt offering or a sacrifice <span class="verse">17:9</span> but does not bring it to the entrance of the Meeting Tent to offer it to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—that person will be cut off from his people. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prohibition against Eating Blood </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:10</span> “‘Any man from the house of Israel or from the resident foreigners who live in their midst who eats any blood, I will set my face against that person who eats the blood, and I will cut him off from the midst of his people, <span class="verse">17:11</span> for the life of every living thing is in the blood. So I myself have assigned it to you on the altar to make atonement for your lives, for the blood makes atonement by means of the life. <span class="verse">17:12</span> Therefore, I have said to the Israelites: No person among you is to eat blood, and no resident foreigner who lives among you is to eat blood. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:13</span> “‘Any man from the Israelites or from the resident foreigners who live in their midst who hunts a wild animal or a bird that may be eaten must pour out its blood and cover it with soil, <span class="verse">17:14</span> for the life of all flesh is its blood. So I have said to the Israelites: You must not eat the blood of any living thing because the life of every living thing is its blood—all who eat it will be cut off. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Regulations for Eating Carcasses </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:15</span> “‘Any person who eats an animal that has died of natural causes or an animal torn by beasts, whether a native citizen or a resident foreigner, must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening; then he will be clean. <span class="verse">17:16</span> But if he does not wash his clothes and does not bathe his body, he will bear his punishment for his iniquity.’” </p>

</body>
</html>