<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Peter 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Peter<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Leading and Living in God’s Flock</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> So as your fellow elder and a witness of Christ’s sufferings and as one who shares in the glory that will be revealed, I urge the elders among you: <span class="verse">5:2</span> Give a shepherd’s care to God’s flock among you, exercising oversight not merely as a duty but willingly under God’s direction, not for shameful profit but eagerly. <span class="verse">5:3</span> And do not lord it over those entrusted to you, but be examples to the flock. <span class="verse">5:4</span> Then when the Chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that never fades away. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:5</span> In the same way, you who are younger, be subject to the elders. And all of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because God <i><b>opposes</b></i> <i><b>the proud but gives grace to the humble</b></i>. <span class="verse">5:6</span> And God will exalt you in due time, if you humble yourselves under his mighty hand <span class="verse">5:7</span> by casting all your cares on him because he cares for you. <span class="verse">5:8</span> Be sober and alert. Your enemy the devil, <i>like</i> <i>a roaring lion,</i> is on the prowl looking for someone to devour. <span class="verse">5:9</span> Resist him, strong in your faith, because you know that your brothers and sisters throughout the world are enduring the same kinds of suffering. <span class="verse">5:10</span> And, after you have suffered for a little while, the God of all grace who called you to his eternal glory in Christ will himself restore, confirm, strengthen, and establish you. <span class="verse">5:11</span> To him belongs the power forever. Amen. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Greetings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:12</span> Through Silvanus, whom I know to be a faithful brother, I have written to you briefly, in order to encourage you and testify that this is the true grace of God. Stand fast in it. <span class="verse">5:13</span> The church in Babylon, chosen together with you, greets you, and so does Mark, my son. <span class="verse">5:14</span> Greet one another with a loving kiss. Peace to all of you who are in Christ. </p>

</body>
</html>