<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 89</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 89</h2><p class="psasuper">A well-written song by Ethan the Ezrahite.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:1</span> I will sing continually about the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s faithful deeds;</p>
<p class="poetry">to future generations I will proclaim your faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:2</span> For I say, “Loyal love is permanently established; </p>
<p class="poetry">in the skies you set up your faithfulness.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I have made a covenant with my chosen one;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have made a promise on oath to David, my servant: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:4</span> ‘I will give you an eternal dynasty </p>
<p class="poetry">and establish your throne throughout future generations.’” (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:5</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the heavens praise your amazing deeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as your faithfulness in the angelic assembly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:6</span> For who in the skies can compare to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who is like the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> among the heavenly beings, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:7</span> a God who is honored in the great angelic assembly, </p>
<p class="poetry">and more awesome than all who surround him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:8</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies! </p>
<p class="poetry">Who is strong like you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?</p>
<p class="poetry">Your faithfulness surrounds you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:9</span> You rule over the proud sea. </p>
<p class="poetry">When its waves surge, you calm them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:10</span> You crushed the Proud One and killed it; </p>
<p class="poetry">with your strong arm you scattered your enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:11</span> The heavens belong to you, as does the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">You made the world and all it contains. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:12</span> You created the north and the south.</p>
<p class="poetry">Tabor and Hermon rejoice in your name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:13</span> Your arm is powerful,</p>
<p class="poetry">your hand strong,</p>
<p class="poetry">your right hand victorious. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:14</span> Equity and justice are the foundation of your throne. </p>
<p class="poetry">Loyal love and faithfulness characterize your rule. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:15</span> How blessed are the people who worship you! </p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, they experience your favor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:16</span> They rejoice in your name all day long,</p>
<p class="poetry">and are vindicated by your justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:17</span> For you give them splendor and strength. </p>
<p class="poetry">By your favor we are victorious. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:18</span> For our shield belongs to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">our king to the Holy One of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:19</span> Then you spoke through a vision to your faithful followers and said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I have placed a young hero over a warrior;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have raised up a young man from the people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:20</span> I have discovered David, my servant.</p>
<p class="poetry">With my holy oil I have anointed him as king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:21</span> My hand will support him, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my arm will strengthen him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:22</span> No enemy will be able to exact tribute from him; </p>
<p class="poetry">a violent oppressor will not be able to humiliate him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:23</span> I will crush his enemies before him;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will strike down those who hate him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:24</span> He will experience my faithfulness and loyal love, </p>
<p class="poetry">and by my name he will win victories. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:25</span> I will place his hand over the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">his right hand over the rivers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:26</span> He will call out to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘You are my father, my God, and the protector who delivers me.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:27</span> I will appoint him to be my firstborn son, </p>
<p class="poetry">the most exalted of the earth’s kings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:28</span> I will always extend my loyal love to him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my covenant with him is secure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:29</span> I will give him an eternal dynasty, </p>
<p class="poetry">and make his throne as enduring as the skies above. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:30</span> If his sons reject my law</p>
<p class="poetry">and disobey my regulations, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:31</span> if they break my rules</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not keep my commandments, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:32</span> I will punish their rebellion by beating them with a club, </p>
<p class="poetry">their sin by inflicting them with bruises. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:33</span> But I will not remove my loyal love from him,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor be unfaithful to my promise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:34</span> I will not break my covenant</p>
<p class="poetry">or go back on what I promised. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:35</span> Once and for all I have vowed by my own holiness,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will never deceive David. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:36</span> His dynasty will last forever. </p>
<p class="poetry">His throne will endure before me, like the sun; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:37</span> it will remain stable, like the moon. </p>
<p class="poetry">His throne will endure like the skies.” (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:38</span> But you have spurned and rejected him;</p>
<p class="poetry">you are angry with your chosen king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:39</span> You have repudiated your covenant with your servant; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have thrown his crown to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:40</span> You have broken down all his walls;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have made his strongholds a heap of ruins.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:41</span> All who pass by have robbed him;</p>
<p class="poetry">he has become an object of disdain to his neighbors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:42</span> You have allowed his adversaries to be victorious, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all his enemies to rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:43</span> You turn back his sword from the adversary, </p>
<p class="poetry">and have not sustained him in battle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:44</span> You have brought to an end his splendor, </p>
<p class="poetry">and have knocked his throne to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:45</span> You have cut short his youth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and have covered him with shame. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:46</span> How long, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, will this last?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will you remain hidden forever? </p>
<p class="poetry">Will your anger continue to burn like fire? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:47</span> Take note of my brief lifespan. </p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you make all people so mortal? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:48</span> No man can live on without experiencing death,</p>
<p class="poetry">or deliver his life from the power of Sheol. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:49</span> Where are your earlier faithful deeds, O Lord, </p>
<p class="poetry">the ones performed in accordance with your reliable oath to David? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:50</span> Take note, O Lord, of the way your servants are taunted, </p>
<p class="poetry">and of how I must bear so many insults from people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:51</span> Your enemies, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, hurl insults;</p>
<p class="poetry">they insult your chosen king as they dog his footsteps. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">89:52</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> deserves praise forevermore!</p>
<p class="poetry">We agree! We agree! </p>

</body>
</html>