<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Revelation 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Revelation<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Opening of the Scroll</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Then I saw in the right hand of the one who was seated on the throne a scroll written on the front and back and sealed with seven seals. <span class="verse">5:2</span> And I saw a powerful angel proclaiming in a loud voice: “Who is worthy to open the scroll and to break its seals?” <span class="verse">5:3</span> But no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or look into it. <span class="verse">5:4</span> So I began weeping bitterly because no one was found who was worthy to open the scroll or to look into it. <span class="verse">5:5</span> Then one of the elders said to me, “Stop weeping! Look, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has conquered; thus he can open the scroll and its seven seals.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:6</span> Then I saw standing in the middle of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the middle of the elders, a Lamb that appeared to have been killed. He had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth. <span class="verse">5:7</span> Then he came and took the scroll from the right hand of the one who was seated on the throne, <span class="verse">5:8</span> and when he had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders threw themselves to the ground before the Lamb. Each of them had a harp and golden bowls full of incense (which are the prayers of the saints). <span class="verse">5:9</span> They were singing a new song: </p>
<p class="poetry">“You are worthy to take the scroll</p>
<p class="poetry">and to open its seals</p>
<p class="poetry">because you were killed, </p>
<p class="poetry">and at the cost of your own blood you have purchased for God </p>
<p class="poetry">persons from every tribe, language, people, and nation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> You have appointed them as a kingdom and priests to serve our God, and they will reign on the earth.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:11</span> Then I looked and heard the voice of many angels in a circle around the throne, as well as the living creatures and the elders. Their number was ten thousand times ten thousand —thousands times thousands— <span class="verse">5:12</span> all of whom were singing in a loud voice:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Worthy is the lamb who was killed </p>
<p class="poetry">to receive power and wealth </p>
<p class="poetry">and wisdom and might </p>
<p class="poetry">and honor and glory and praise!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:13</span> Then I heard every creature—in heaven, on earth, under the earth, in the sea, and all that is in them—singing: </p>
<p class="poetry">“To the one seated on the throne and to the Lamb</p>
<p class="poetry">be praise, honor, glory, and ruling power forever and ever!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:14</span> And the four living creatures were saying “Amen,” and the elders threw themselves to the ground and worshiped. </p>

</body>
</html>