<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 33</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 33</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:1</span> You godly ones, shout for joy because of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">It is appropriate for the morally upright to offer him praise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:2</span> Give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with the harp.</p>
<p class="poetry">Sing to him to the accompaniment of a ten-stringed instrument. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:3</span> Sing to him a new song. </p>
<p class="poetry">Play skillfully as you shout out your praises to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:4</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s decrees are just, </p>
<p class="poetry">and everything he does is fair. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:5</span> He promotes equity and justice;</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s faithfulness extends throughout the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:6</span> By the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s decree the heavens were made,</p>
<p class="poetry">and by the breath of his mouth all the starry hosts.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:7</span> He piles up the water of the sea; </p>
<p class="poetry">he puts the oceans in storehouses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:8</span> Let the whole earth fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let all who live in the world stand in awe of him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:9</span> For he spoke, and it came into existence.</p>
<p class="poetry">He issued the decree, and it stood firm.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> frustrates the decisions of the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">he nullifies the plans of the peoples. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s decisions stand forever;</p>
<p class="poetry">his plans abide throughout the ages. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:12</span> How blessed is the nation whose God is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the people whom he has chosen to be his special possession. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> watches from heaven;</p>
<p class="poetry">he sees all people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:14</span> From the place where he lives he looks carefully</p>
<p class="poetry">at all the earth’s inhabitants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:15</span> He is the one who forms every human heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">and takes note of all their actions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:16</span> No king is delivered by his vast army;</p>
<p class="poetry">a warrior is not saved by his great might. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:17</span> A horse disappoints those who trust in it for victory; </p>
<p class="poetry">despite its great strength, it cannot deliver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:18</span> Look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> takes notice of his loyal followers, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who wait for him to demonstrate his faithfulness </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:19</span> by saving their lives from death </p>
<p class="poetry">and sustaining them during times of famine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:20</span> We wait for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is our deliverer and shield. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:21</span> For our hearts rejoice in him,</p>
<p class="poetry">for we trust in his holy name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:22</span> May we experience your faithfulness, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">for we wait for you.</p>

</body>
</html>