<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 58</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 58</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>al-tashcheth</i> style; a prayer of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:1</span> Do you rulers really pronounce just decisions? </p>
<p class="poetry">Do you judge people fairly? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:2</span> No! You plan how to do what is unjust; </p>
<p class="poetry">you deal out violence in the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:3</span> The wicked turn aside from birth; </p>
<p class="poetry">liars go astray as soon as they are born. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:4</span> Their venom is like that of a snake, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a deaf serpent that does not hear, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:5</span> that does not respond to the magicians,</p>
<p class="poetry">or to a skilled snake charmer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:6</span> O God, break the teeth in their mouths!</p>
<p class="poetry">Smash the jawbones of the lions, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:7</span> Let them disappear like water that flows away. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let them wither like grass. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:8</span> Let them be like a snail that melts away as it moves along. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let them be like stillborn babies that never see the sun. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:9</span> Before the kindling is even placed under your pots, </p>
<p class="poetry">he will sweep it away along with both the raw and cooked meat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:10</span> The godly will rejoice when they see vengeance carried out;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will bathe their feet in the blood of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">58:11</span> Then observers will say,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Yes indeed, the godly are rewarded. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes indeed, there is a God who judges in the earth.” </p>

</body>
</html>