<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 74</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 74</h2><p class="psasuper">A well-written song by Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:1</span> Why, O God, have you permanently rejected us? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why does your anger burn against the sheep of your pasture? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:2</span> Remember your people whom you acquired in ancient times,</p>
<p class="poetry">whom you rescued so they could be your very own nation, </p>
<p class="poetry">as well as Mount Zion, where you dwell. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:3</span> Hurry to the permanent ruins,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to all the damage the enemy has done to the temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:4</span> Your enemies roar in the middle of your sanctuary; </p>
<p class="poetry">they set up their battle flags. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:5</span> They invade like lumberjacks</p>
<p class="poetry">swinging their axes in a thick forest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:6</span> And now they are tearing down all its engravings </p>
<p class="poetry">with axes and crowbars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:7</span> They set your sanctuary on fire;</p>
<p class="poetry">they desecrate your dwelling place by knocking it to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:8</span> They say to themselves, </p>
<p class="poetry">“We will oppress all of them.” </p>
<p class="poetry">They burn down all the places in the land where people worship God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:9</span> We do not see any signs of God’s presence; </p>
<p class="poetry">there are no longer any prophets, </p>
<p class="poetry">and we have no one to tell us how long this will last. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:10</span> How long, O God, will the adversary hurl insults?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will the enemy blaspheme your name forever? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:11</span> Why do you remain inactive?</p>
<p class="poetry">Intervene and destroy him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:12</span> But God has been my king from ancient times,</p>
<p class="poetry">performing acts of deliverance on the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:13</span> You destroyed the sea by your strength;</p>
<p class="poetry">you shattered the heads of the sea monster in the water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:14</span> You crushed the heads of Leviathan; </p>
<p class="poetry">you fed him to the people who live along the coast. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:15</span> You broke open the spring and the stream; </p>
<p class="poetry">you dried up perpetually flowing rivers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:16</span> You established the cycle of day and night; </p>
<p class="poetry">you put the moon and sun in place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:17</span> You set up all the boundaries of the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">you created the cycle of summer and winter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:18</span> Remember how the enemy hurls insults, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">and how a foolish nation blasphemes your name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:19</span> Do not hand the life of your dove over to a wild animal.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not continue to disregard the lives of your oppressed people.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:20</span> Remember your covenant promises, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the dark regions of the earth are full of places where violence rules. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:21</span> Do not let the afflicted be turned back in shame.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the oppressed and poor praise your name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:22</span> Rise up, O God. Defend your honor. </p>
<p class="poetry">Remember how fools insult you all day long. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">74:23</span> Do not disregard what your enemies say, </p>
<p class="poetry">or the unceasing shouts of those who defy you. </p>

</body>
</html>