<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 26</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 26</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judah Will Celebrate</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:1</span> At that time this song will be sung in the land of Judah:</p>
<p class="poetry">“We have a strong city!</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s deliverance, like walls and a rampart, makes it secure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:2</span> Open the gates so a righteous nation can enter—</p>
<p class="poetry">one that remains trustworthy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:3</span> You keep completely safe the people who maintain their faith,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they trust in you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:4</span> Trust in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from this time forward, </p>
<p class="poetry">even in <span class="smcaps">Yah</span>, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, an enduring protector! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:5</span> Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> knocks down those who live in a high place,</p>
<p class="poetry">he brings down an elevated town;</p>
<p class="poetry">he brings it down to the ground, </p>
<p class="poetry">he throws it down to the dust. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:6</span> It is trampled underfoot</p>
<p class="poetry">by the feet of the oppressed,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the soles of the poor.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s People Anticipate Vindication</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:7</span>  The way of the righteous is level, </p>
<p class="poetry">the path of the righteous that you prepare is straight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:8</span> Yes, as your judgments unfold, </p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, we wait for you.</p>
<p class="poetry">We desire your fame and reputation to grow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:9</span> I look for you during the night;</p>
<p class="poetry">my spirit within me seeks you at dawn,</p>
<p class="poetry">for when your judgments come upon the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who live in the world learn about justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:10</span> If the wicked are shown mercy,</p>
<p class="poetry">they do not learn about justice. </p>
<p class="poetry">Even in a land where right is rewarded, they act unjustly; </p>
<p class="poetry">they do not see the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s majesty revealed.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:11</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you are ready to act, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they don’t even notice.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will see and be put to shame by your angry judgment against humankind; </p>
<p class="poetry">yes, fire will consume your enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:12</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you make us secure, </p>
<p class="poetry">for even all we have accomplished, you have done for us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:13</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our God,</p>
<p class="poetry">masters other than you have ruled us,</p>
<p class="poetry">but we praise your name alone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:14</span> The dead do not come back to life,</p>
<p class="poetry">the spirits of the dead do not rise. </p>
<p class="poetry">That is because you came in judgment and destroyed them,</p>
<p class="poetry">you wiped out all memory of them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:15</span> You have made the nation larger, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have made the nation larger and revealed your splendor; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have extended all the borders of the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:16</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, in distress they looked for you;</p>
<p class="poetry">they uttered incantations because of your discipline. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:17</span> As when a pregnant woman gets ready to deliver</p>
<p class="poetry">and strains and cries out because of her labor pains,</p>
<p class="poetry">so were we because of you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:18</span> We were pregnant, we strained,</p>
<p class="poetry">we gave birth, as it were, to wind. </p>
<p class="poetry">We cannot produce deliverance on the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">no people are born to populate the world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:19</span>  Your dead will come back to life;</p>
<p class="poetry">your corpses will rise up.</p>
<p class="poetry">Wake up and shout joyfully, you who live in the ground! </p>
<p class="poetry">For you will grow like plants drenched with the morning dew, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the earth will bring forth its dead spirits. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:20</span> Go, my people! Enter your inner rooms!</p>
<p class="poetry">Close your doors behind you!</p>
<p class="poetry">Hide for a little while,</p>
<p class="poetry">until his angry judgment is over. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">26:21</span> For look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is coming out of the place where he lives, </p>
<p class="poetry">to punish the sin of those who live on the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">The earth will display the blood shed on it;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will no longer cover up its slain. </p>

</body>
</html>