<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Damascus</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:1</span> This is an oracle about Damascus:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Look, Damascus is no longer a city,</p>
<p class="poetry">it is a heap of ruins! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:2</span> The cities of Aroer are abandoned. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will be used for herds,</p>
<p class="poetry">which will lie down there in peace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:3</span> Fortified cities will disappear from Ephraim,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Damascus will lose its kingdom. </p>
<p class="poetry">The survivors in Syria</p>
<p class="poetry">will end up like the splendor of the Israelites,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:4</span> “At that time </p>
<p class="poetry">Jacob’s splendor will be greatly diminished, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he will become skin and bones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:5</span> It will be as when one gathers the grain harvest, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his hand gleans the ear of grain.</p>
<p class="poetry">It will be like one gathering the ears of grain</p>
<p class="poetry">in the Valley of Rephaim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:6</span> There will be some left behind,</p>
<p class="poetry">as when an olive tree is beaten—</p>
<p class="poetry">two or three ripe olives remain toward the very top,</p>
<p class="poetry">four or five on its fruitful branches,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:7</span> At that time men will trust in their Creator; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will depend on the Holy One of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:8</span> They will no longer trust in the altars their hands made,</p>
<p class="poetry">or depend on the Asherah poles and incense altars their fingers made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:9</span> At that time their fortified cities will be </p>
<p class="poetry">like the abandoned summits of the Amorites, </p>
<p class="poetry">which they abandoned because of the Israelites;</p>
<p class="poetry">there will be desolation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:10</span> For you ignore the God who rescues you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you pay no attention to your strong protector. </p>
<p class="poetry">So this is what happens:</p>
<p class="poetry">You cultivate beautiful plants</p>
<p class="poetry">and plant exotic vines. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:11</span> The day you begin cultivating, you do what you can to make it grow; </p>
<p class="poetry">the morning you begin planting, you do what you can to make it sprout.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yet the harvest will disappear in the day of disease</p>
<p class="poetry">and incurable pain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:12</span> Beware, you many nations massing together, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who make a commotion as loud as the roaring of the sea’s waves. </p>
<p class="poetry">Beware, you people making such an uproar, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who make an uproar as loud as the roaring of powerful waves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:13</span> Though these people make an uproar as loud as the roaring of powerful waves, </p>
<p class="poetry">when he shouts at them, they will flee to a distant land,</p>
<p class="poetry">driven before the wind like dead weeds on the hills,</p>
<p class="poetry">or like dead thistles before a strong gale. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:14</span> In the evening there is sudden terror; </p>
<p class="poetry">by morning they vanish. </p>
<p class="poetry">This is the fate of those who try to plunder us,</p>
<p class="poetry">the destiny of those who try to loot us! </p>

</body>
</html>