<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peace-Offering Regulations: Animal from the Herd </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> “‘Now if his offering is a peace-offering sacrifice, if he presents an offering from the herd, he must present before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> a flawless male or a female. <span class="verse">3:2</span> He must lay his hand on the head of his offering and slaughter it at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, must splash the blood against the altar’s sides. <span class="verse">3:3</span> Then the one presenting the offering must present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from the peace-offering sacrifice: He must remove the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that surrounds the entrails, <span class="verse">3:4</span> the two kidneys with the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he is to remove along with the kidneys). <span class="verse">3:5</span> Then the sons of Aaron must offer it up in smoke on the altar atop the burnt offering that is on the wood in the fire as a gift of a soothing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Animal from the Flock </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:6</span> “‘If his offering for a peace-offering sacrifice to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is from the flock, he must present a flawless male or female. <span class="verse">3:7</span> If he presents a sheep as his offering, he must present it before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">3:8</span> He must lay his hand on the head of his offering and slaughter it before the Meeting Tent, and the sons of Aaron must splash its blood against the altar’s sides. <span class="verse">3:9</span> Then he must present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from the peace-offering sacrifice: He must remove all the fatty tail up to the end of the spine, the fat covering the entrails, and all the fat on the entrails, <span class="verse">3:10</span> the two kidneys with the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he is to remove along with the kidneys). <span class="verse">3:11</span> Then the priest must offer it up in smoke on the altar as a food gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> “‘If his offering is a goat he must present it before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, <span class="verse">3:13</span> lay his hand on its head, and slaughter it before the Meeting Tent, and the sons of Aaron must splash its blood against the altar’s sides. <span class="verse">3:14</span> Then he must present from it his offering as a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>: the fat which covers the entrails and all the fat on the entrails, <span class="verse">3:15</span> the two kidneys with the fat on their sinews, and the protruding lobe on the liver (which he is to remove along with the kidneys). <span class="verse">3:16</span> Then the priest must offer them up in smoke on the altar as a food gift for a soothing aroma—all the fat belongs to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">3:17</span> This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all the places where you live: You must never eat any fat or any blood.’” </p>

</body>
</html>