<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Acts 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Acts<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter Visits Cornelius</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> Now there was a man in Caesarea named Cornelius, a centurion of what was known as the Italian Cohort. <span class="verse">10:2</span> He was a devout, God-fearing man, as was all his household; he did many acts of charity for the people and prayed to God regularly. <span class="verse">10:3</span> About three o’clock one afternoon he saw clearly in a vision an angel of God who came in and said to him, “Cornelius.” <span class="verse">10:4</span> Staring at him and becoming greatly afraid, Cornelius replied, “What is it, Lord?” The angel said to him, “Your prayers and your acts of charity have gone up as a memorial before God. <span class="verse">10:5</span> Now send men to Joppa and summon a man named Simon, who is called Peter. <span class="verse">10:6</span> This man is staying as a guest with a man named Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the sea.” <span class="verse">10:7</span> When the angel who had spoken to him departed, Cornelius called two of his personal servants and a devout soldier from among those who served him, <span class="verse">10:8</span> and when he had explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:9</span> About noon the next day, while they were on their way and approaching the city, Peter went up on the roof to pray. <span class="verse">10:10</span> He became hungry and wanted to eat, but while they were preparing the meal, a trance came over him. <span class="verse">10:11</span> He saw heaven opened and an object something like a large sheet descending, being let down to earth by its four corners. <span class="verse">10:12</span> In it were all kinds of four-footed animals and reptiles of the earth and wild birds. <span class="verse">10:13</span> Then a voice said to him, “Get up, Peter; slaughter and eat!” <span class="verse">10:14</span> But Peter said, “Certainly not, Lord, for I have never eaten anything defiled and ritually unclean!” <span class="verse">10:15</span> The voice spoke to him again, a second time, “What God has made clean, you must not consider ritually unclean!” <span class="verse">10:16</span> This happened three times, and immediately the object was taken up into heaven. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:17</span> Now while Peter was puzzling over what the vision he had seen could signify, the men sent by Cornelius had learned where Simon’s house was and approached the gate. <span class="verse">10:18</span> They called out to ask if Simon, known as Peter, was staying there as a guest. <span class="verse">10:19</span> While Peter was still thinking seriously about the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Look! Three men are looking for you. <span class="verse">10:20</span> But get up, go down, and accompany them without hesitation, because I have sent them.” <span class="verse">10:21</span> So Peter went down to the men and said, “Here I am, the person you’re looking for. Why have you come?” <span class="verse">10:22</span> They said, “Cornelius the centurion, a righteous and God-fearing man, well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, was directed by a holy angel to summon you to his house and to hear a message from you.” <span class="verse">10:23</span> So Peter invited them in and entertained them as guests.</p>
<p class="bodytext">On the next day he got up and set out with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him. <span class="verse">10:24</span> The following day he entered Caesarea. Now Cornelius was waiting anxiously for them and had called together his relatives and close friends. <span class="verse">10:25</span> So when Peter came in, Cornelius met him, fell at his feet, and worshiped him. <span class="verse">10:26</span> But Peter helped him up, saying, “Stand up. I too am a mere mortal.” <span class="verse">10:27</span> Peter continued talking with him as he went in, and he found many people gathered together. <span class="verse">10:28</span> He said to them, “You know that it is unlawful for a Jew to associate with or visit a Gentile, yet God has shown me that I should call no person defiled or ritually unclean. <span class="verse">10:29</span> Therefore when you sent for me, I came without any objection. Now may I ask why you sent for me?” <span class="verse">10:30</span> Cornelius replied, “Four days ago at this very hour, at three o’clock in the afternoon, I was praying in my house, and suddenly a man in shining clothing stood before me <span class="verse">10:31</span> and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard and your acts of charity have been remembered before God. <span class="verse">10:32</span> Therefore send to Joppa and summon Simon, who is called Peter. This man is staying as a guest in the house of Simon the tanner, by the sea.’ <span class="verse">10:33</span> Therefore I sent for you at once, and you were kind enough to come. So now we are all here in the presence of God to listen to everything the Lord has commanded you to say to us.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:34</span> Then Peter started speaking: “I now truly understand that God does not show favoritism in dealing with people, <span class="verse">10:35</span> but in every nation the person who fears him and does what is right is welcomed before him. <span class="verse">10:36</span> You know the message he sent to the people of Israel, proclaiming the good news of peace through Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all)— <span class="verse">10:37</span> you know what happened throughout Judea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism that John announced: <span class="verse">10:38</span> with respect to Jesus from Nazareth, that God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power. He went around doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, because God was with him. <span class="verse">10:39</span> We are witnesses of all the things he did both in Judea and in Jerusalem. They killed him by hanging him on a tree, <span class="verse">10:40</span> but God raised him up on the third day and caused him to be seen, <span class="verse">10:41</span> not by all the people, but by us, the witnesses God had already chosen, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead. <span class="verse">10:42</span> He commanded us to preach to the people and to warn them that he is the one appointed by God as judge of the living and the dead. <span class="verse">10:43</span> About him all the prophets testify, that everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Gentiles Receive the Holy Spirit</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:44</span> While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the message. <span class="verse">10:45</span> The circumcised believers who had accompanied Peter were greatly astonished that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on the Gentiles, <span class="verse">10:46</span> for they heard them speaking in tongues and praising God. Then Peter said, <span class="verse">10:47</span> “No one can withhold the water for these people to be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit just as we did, can he?” <span class="verse">10:48</span> So he gave orders to have them baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay for several days. </p>

</body>
</html>