<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Organizes the Musicians</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span> David and the army officers selected some of the sons of Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun to prophesy as they played stringed instruments and cymbals. The following men were assigned this responsibility: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:2</span> From the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah, and Asarelah. The sons of Asaph were supervised by Asaph, who prophesied under the king’s supervision. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:3</span> From the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah—six in all, under supervision of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied as he played a harp, giving thanks and praise to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:4</span> From the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, Romamti-Ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth. <span class="verse">25:5</span> All these were the sons of Heman, the king’s prophet. God had promised him these sons in order to make him prestigious. God gave Heman fourteen sons and three daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:6</span> All these were under the supervision of their fathers; they were musicians in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple, playing cymbals and stringed instruments as they served in God’s temple. Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman were under the supervision of the king. <span class="verse">25:7</span> They and their relatives, all of them skilled and trained to make music to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, numbered 288. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:8</span> They cast lots to determine their responsibilities—oldest as well as youngest, teacher as well as student. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:9</span> The first lot went to Asaph’s son Joseph and his relatives and sons—twelve in all, </p>
<p class="bodytext">the second to Gedaliah and his relatives and sons—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:10</span> the third to Zaccur and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:11</span> the fourth to Izri and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:12</span> the fifth to Nethaniah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:13</span> the sixth to Bukkiah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:14</span> the seventh to Jesharelah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:15</span> the eighth to Jeshaiah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:16</span> the ninth to Mattaniah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:17</span> the tenth to Shimei and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:18</span> the eleventh to Azarel and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:19</span> the twelfth to Hashabiah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:20</span> the thirteenth to Shubael and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:21</span> the fourteenth to Mattithiah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:22</span> the fifteenth to Jerimoth and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:23</span> the sixteenth to Hananiah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:24</span> the seventeenth to Joshbekashah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:25</span> the eighteenth to Hanani and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:26</span> the nineteenth to Mallothi and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:27</span> the twentieth to Eliathah and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:28</span> the twenty-first to Hothir and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:29</span> the twenty-second to Giddalti and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:30</span> the twenty-third to Mahazioth and his sons and relatives—twelve in all,</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:31</span> the twenty-fourth to Romamti-Ezer and his sons and relatives—twelve in all.</p>

</body>
</html>