<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Kings 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Kings<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elisha Helps a Widow and Her Sons</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Now a wife of one of the prophets appealed to Elisha for help, saying, “Your servant, my husband is dead. You know that your servant was a loyal follower of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Now the creditor is coming to take away my two boys to be his servants.” <span class="verse">4:2</span> Elisha said to her, “What can I do for you? Tell me, what do you have in the house?” She answered, “Your servant has nothing in the house except a small jar of olive oil.” <span class="verse">4:3</span> He said, “Go and ask all your neighbors for empty containers. Get as many as you can. <span class="verse">4:4</span> Go and close the door behind you and your sons. Pour the olive oil into all the containers; set aside each one when you have filled it.” <span class="verse">4:5</span> So she left him and closed the door behind her and her sons. As they were bringing the containers to her, she was pouring the olive oil. <span class="verse">4:6</span> When the containers were full, she said to one of her sons, “Bring me another container.” But he answered her, “There are no more.” Then the olive oil stopped flowing. <span class="verse">4:7</span> She went and told the prophet. He said, “Go, sell the olive oil. Repay your creditor, and then you and your sons can live off the rest of the profit.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elisha Gives Life to a Boy</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:8</span> One day Elisha traveled to Shunem, where a prominent woman lived. She insisted that he stop for a meal. So whenever he was passing through, he would stop in there for a meal. <span class="verse">4:9</span> She said to her husband, “Look, I’m sure that the man who regularly passes through here is a very special prophet. <span class="verse">4:10</span> Let’s make a small, private upper room and furnish it with a bed, table, chair, and lamp. When he visits us, he can stay there.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:11</span> One day Elisha came for a visit; he went into the upper room and rested. <span class="verse">4:12</span> He told his servant Gehazi, “Ask the Shunammite woman to come here.” So he did so and she came to him. <span class="verse">4:13</span> Elisha said to Gehazi, “Tell her, ‘Look, you have treated us with such great respect. What can I do for you? Can I put in a good word for you with the king or the commander of the army?’” She replied, “I’m quite secure.” <span class="verse">4:14</span> So he asked Gehazi, “What can I do for her?” Gehazi replied, “She has no son, and her husband is old.” <span class="verse">4:15</span> Elisha told him, “Ask her to come here.” So he did so and she came and stood in the doorway. <span class="verse">4:16</span> He said, “About this time next year you will be holding a son.” She said, “No, my master! O prophet, do not lie to your servant!” <span class="verse">4:17</span> The woman did conceive, and at the specified time the next year she gave birth to a son, just as Elisha had told her. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:18</span> The boy grew and one day he went out to see his father who was with the harvest workers. <span class="verse">4:19</span> He said to his father, “My head! My head!” His father told a servant, “Carry him to his mother.” <span class="verse">4:20</span> So he picked him up and took him to his mother. He sat on her lap until noon and then died. <span class="verse">4:21</span> She went up and laid him down on the prophet’s bed. She shut the door behind her and left. <span class="verse">4:22</span> She called to her husband, “Send me one of the servants and one of the donkeys, so I can go see the prophet quickly and then return.” <span class="verse">4:23</span> He said, “Why do you want to go see him today? It is not the new moon or the Sabbath.” She said, “Everything’s fine.” <span class="verse">4:24</span> She saddled the donkey and told her servant, “Lead on. Do not stop unless I say so.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:25</span> So she went to visit the prophet at Mount Carmel. When he saw her at a distance, he said to his servant Gehazi, “Look, it’s the Shunammite woman. <span class="verse">4:26</span> Now, run to meet her and ask her, ‘Are you well? Are your husband and the boy well?’” She told Gehazi, “Everything’s fine.” <span class="verse">4:27</span> But when she reached the prophet on the mountain, she grabbed hold of his feet. Gehazi came near to push her away, but the prophet said, “Leave her alone, for she is very upset. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has kept the matter hidden from me; he didn’t tell me about it.” <span class="verse">4:28</span> She said, “Did I ask my master for a son? Didn’t I say, ‘Don’t mislead me?’” <span class="verse">4:29</span> Elisha told Gehazi, “Tuck your robes into your belt, take my staff, and go! Don’t stop to exchange greetings with anyone! Place my staff on the child’s face.” <span class="verse">4:30</span> The mother of the child said, “As certainly as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So Elisha got up and followed her back. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:31</span> Now Gehazi went on ahead of them. He placed the staff on the child’s face, but there was no sound or response. When he came back to Elisha he told him, “The child did not wake up.” <span class="verse">4:32</span> When Elisha arrived at the house, there was the child lying dead on his bed. <span class="verse">4:33</span> He went in by himself and closed the door. Then he prayed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">4:34</span> He got up on the bed and spread his body out over the boy; he put his mouth on the boy’s mouth, his eyes over the boy’s eyes, and the palms of his hands against the boy’s palms. As he bent down across him, the boy’s skin grew warm. <span class="verse">4:35</span> Elisha went back and walked around in the house. Then he got up on the bed again and bent down over him. The child sneezed seven times and opened his eyes. <span class="verse">4:36</span> Elisha called to Gehazi and said, “Get the Shunammite woman.” So he did so and she came to him. He said to her, “Take your son.” <span class="verse">4:37</span> She came in, fell at his feet, and bowed down. Then she picked up her son and left. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elisha Makes a Meal Edible</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:38</span> Now Elisha went back to Gilgal, while there was a famine in the land. Some of the prophets were visiting him and he told his servant, “Put the big pot on the fire and boil some stew for the prophets.” <span class="verse">4:39</span> Someone went out to the field to gather some herbs and found a wild vine. He picked some of its fruit, enough to fill up the fold of his robe. He came back, cut it up, and threw the slices into the stew pot, not knowing they were harmful. <span class="verse">4:40</span> The stew was poured out for the men to eat. When they ate some of the stew, they cried out, “Death is in the pot, O prophet!” They could not eat it. <span class="verse">4:41</span> He said, “Get some flour.” Then he threw it into the pot and said, “Now pour some out for the men so they may eat.” There was no longer anything harmful in the pot. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elisha Miraculously Feeds a Hundred People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:42</span> Now a man from Baal Shalisha brought some food for the prophet —twenty loaves of bread made from the firstfruits of the barley harvest, as well as fresh ears of grain. Elisha said, “Set it before the people so they may eat.” <span class="verse">4:43</span> But his attendant said, “How can I feed a hundred men with this?” He replied, “Set it before the people so they may eat, for this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said, ‘They will eat and have some left over.’” <span class="verse">4:44</span> So he set it before them; they ate and had some left over, just as in the <span class="smcaps">Lord’s</span> message.</p>

</body>
</html>