<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jeremiah Confronted by a False Prophet</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:1</span> The following events occurred in that same year, early in the reign of King Zedekiah of Judah. To be more precise, it was the fifth month of the fourth year of his reign. The prophet Hananiah son of Azzur, who was from Gibeon, spoke to Jeremiah in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple in the presence of the priests and all the people: <span class="verse">28:2</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘I will break the yoke of servitude to the king of Babylon. <span class="verse">28:3</span> Before two years are over, I will bring back to this place everything that King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon took from it and carried away to Babylon. <span class="verse">28:4</span> I will also bring back to this place Jehoiakim’s son King Jeconiah of Judah and all the exiles who were taken to Babylon.’ Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> affirms, ‘I will break the yoke of servitude to the king of Babylon.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:5</span> Then the prophet Jeremiah responded to the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. <span class="verse">28:6</span> The prophet Jeremiah said, “Amen! May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> do all this! May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> make your prophecy come true! May he bring back to this place from Babylon all the valuable articles taken from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and the people who were carried into exile. <span class="verse">28:7</span> But listen to what I say to you and to all these people. <span class="verse">28:8</span> From earliest times, the prophets who preceded you and me invariably prophesied war, disaster, and plagues against many countries and great kingdoms. <span class="verse">28:9</span> So if a prophet prophesied peace and prosperity, it was only known that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> truly sent him when what he prophesied came true.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:10</span> The prophet Hananiah then took the yoke off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck and broke it. <span class="verse">28:11</span> Then he spoke up in the presence of all the people. “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, ‘In the same way I will break the yoke of servitude of all the nations to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon before two years are over.’” After he heard this, the prophet Jeremiah departed and went on his way. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:12</span> But shortly after the prophet Hananiah had broken the yoke off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to Jeremiah. <span class="verse">28:13</span> “Go and tell Hananiah that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, ‘You have indeed broken the wooden yoke. But you have only succeeded in replacing it with an iron one! <span class="verse">28:14</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel, says, “I have put an irresistible yoke of servitude on all these nations so they will serve King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. And they will indeed serve him. I have even given him control over the wild animals.”’” <span class="verse">28:15</span> Then the prophet Jeremiah told the prophet Hananiah, “Listen, Hananiah! The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> did not send you! You are making these people trust in a lie. <span class="verse">28:16</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, ‘I will most assuredly remove you from the face of the earth. You will die this very year because you have counseled rebellion against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:17</span> In the seventh month of that very same year the prophet Hananiah died. </p>

</body>
</html>