<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 48</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 48</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Appeals to the Exiles</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:1</span> Listen to this, O family of Jacob, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who are called by the name ‘Israel,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and are descended from Judah, </p>
<p class="poetry">who take oaths in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and invoke the God of Israel—</p>
<p class="poetry">but not in an honest and just manner. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:2</span> Indeed, they live in the holy city; </p>
<p class="poetry">they trust in the God of Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">whose name is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:3</span> “I announced events beforehand, </p>
<p class="poetry">I issued the decrees and made the predictions; </p>
<p class="poetry">suddenly I acted and they came to pass.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:4</span> I did this because I know how stubborn you are.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your neck muscles are like iron</p>
<p class="poetry">and your forehead like bronze. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:5</span> I announced them to you beforehand;</p>
<p class="poetry">before they happened, I predicted them for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">so you could never say,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘My image did these things,</p>
<p class="poetry">my idol, my cast image, decreed them.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:6</span> You have heard; now look at all the evidence! </p>
<p class="poetry">Will you not admit that what I say is true? </p>
<p class="poetry">From this point on I am announcing to you new events</p>
<p class="poetry">that are previously unrevealed and you do not know about. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:7</span> Now they come into being, not in the past;</p>
<p class="poetry">before today you did not hear about them,</p>
<p class="poetry">so you could not say,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Yes, I know about them.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:8</span> You did not hear,</p>
<p class="poetry">you do not know,</p>
<p class="poetry">you were not told beforehand. </p>
<p class="poetry">For I know that you are very deceitful; </p>
<p class="poetry">you were labeled a rebel from birth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:9</span> For the sake of my reputation I hold back my anger;</p>
<p class="poetry">for the sake of my prestige I restrain myself from destroying you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:10</span> Look, I have refined you, but not as silver;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have purified you in the furnace of misery. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:11</span> For my sake alone I will act,</p>
<p class="poetry">for how can I allow my name to be defiled? </p>
<p class="poetry">I will not share my glory with anyone else! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:12</span> Listen to me, O Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel, whom I summoned.</p>
<p class="poetry">I am the one;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am present at the very beginning</p>
<p class="poetry">and at the very end. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:13</span> Yes, my hand founded the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">my right hand spread out the sky.</p>
<p class="poetry">I summon them;</p>
<p class="poetry">they stand together. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:14</span> All of you, gather together and listen!</p>
<p class="poetry">Who among them announced these things?</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s ally will carry out his desire against Babylon;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will exert his power against the Babylonians. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:15</span> I, I have spoken—</p>
<p class="poetry">yes, I have summoned him;</p>
<p class="poetry">I lead him and he will succeed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:16</span> Approach me—listen to this!</p>
<p class="poetry">From the very first I have not spoken in secret;</p>
<p class="poetry">when it happens, I am there.”</p>
<p class="poetry">So now, the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has sent me, accompanied by his Spirit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:17</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, your Protector, says,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Holy One of Israel: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">who teaches you how to succeed,</p>
<p class="poetry">who leads you in the way you should go. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:18</span> If only you had obeyed my commandments,</p>
<p class="poetry">prosperity would have flowed to you like a river, </p>
<p class="poetry">deliverance would have come to you like the waves of the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:19</span> Your descendants would have been as numerous as sand, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your children like its granules.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their name would not have been cut off</p>
<p class="poetry">and eliminated from my presence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:20</span> Leave Babylon!</p>
<p class="poetry">Flee from the Babylonians!</p>
<p class="poetry">Announce it with a shout of joy!</p>
<p class="poetry">Make this known—</p>
<p class="poetry">proclaim it throughout the earth! </p>
<p class="poetry">Say, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protects his servant Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:21</span> They do not thirst as he leads them through dry regions;</p>
<p class="poetry">he makes water flow out of a rock for them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he splits open a rock and water flows out.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:22</span> There will be no prosperity for the wicked,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>