<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:1</span> Better is a poor person who walks in his integrity </p>
<p class="poetry">than one who is perverse in his speech and is a fool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:2</span> It is dangerous to have zeal without knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who acts hastily makes poor choices. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:3</span> A person’s folly subverts his way,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his heart rages against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:4</span> Wealth adds many friends,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a poor person is separated from his friend. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:5</span> A false witness will not go unpunished,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who spouts out lies will not escape punishment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:6</span> Many people entreat the favor of a generous person, </p>
<p class="poetry">and everyone is the friend of the person who gives gifts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:7</span> All the relatives of a poor person hate him; </p>
<p class="poetry">how much more do his friends avoid him—</p>
<p class="poetry">one who chases words, which are nothing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:8</span> The one who acquires understanding loves himself; </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who preserves understanding will prosper. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:9</span> A false witness will not go unpunished,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who spouts out lies will perish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:10</span> Luxury is not appropriate for a fool; </p>
<p class="poetry">how much less for a servant to rule over princes! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:11</span> A person’s wisdom has made him slow to anger, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it is his glory to overlook an offense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:12</span> A king’s wrath is like the roar of a lion, </p>
<p class="poetry">but his favor is like dew on the grass. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:13</span> A foolish child is the ruin of his father,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a contentious wife is like a constant dripping. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:14</span> A house and wealth are inherited from parents, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a prudent wife is from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:15</span> Laziness brings on a deep sleep, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the idle person will go hungry. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:16</span> The one who obeys commandments guards his life;</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who despises his ways will die. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:17</span> The one who is gracious to the poor lends to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will repay him for his good deed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:18</span> Discipline your child, for there is hope,</p>
<p class="poetry">but do not set your heart on causing his death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:19</span> A person with great anger bears the penalty, </p>
<p class="poetry">but if you deliver him from it once, you will have to do it again. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:20</span> Listen to advice and receive discipline,</p>
<p class="poetry">that you may become wise by the end of your life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:21</span> There are many plans in a person’s mind, </p>
<p class="poetry">but it is the counsel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> that will stand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:22</span> What is desirable for a person is to show loyal love, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a poor person is better than a liar. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:23</span> Fearing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> leads to life, </p>
<p class="poetry">and one who does so will live satisfied; he will not be afflicted by calamity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:24</span> The sluggard has plunged his hand into the dish,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he will not even bring it back to his mouth! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:25</span> Flog a scorner, and as a result the simpleton will learn prudence; </p>
<p class="poetry">correct a discerning person, and as a result he will understand knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:26</span> The one who robs his father and chases away his mother</p>
<p class="poetry">is a son who brings shame and disgrace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:27</span> If you stop listening to instruction, my child,</p>
<p class="poetry">you will stray from the words of knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:28</span> A crooked witness scorns justice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the mouth of the wicked devours iniquity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:29</span> Penalties have been prepared for scorners,</p>
<p class="poetry">and floggings for the backs of fools. </p>

</body>
</html>