<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 41</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 41</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:1</span> How blessed is the one who treats the poor properly. </p>
<p class="poetry">When trouble comes, may the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> deliver him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:2</span> May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protect him and save his life. </p>
<p class="poetry">May he be blessed in the land.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not turn him over to his enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> supports him on his sickbed;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have healed him from his illness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:4</span> As for me, I said: </p>
<p class="poetry">“O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have mercy on me!</p>
<p class="poetry">Heal me, for I have sinned against you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:5</span> My enemies ask this cruel question about me, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘When will he finally die and be forgotten?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:6</span> When someone comes to visit, he pretends to be friendly; </p>
<p class="poetry">he thinks of ways to defame me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and when he leaves he slanders me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:7</span> All who hate me whisper insults about me to one another; </p>
<p class="poetry">they plan ways to harm me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:8</span> They say, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘An awful disease overwhelms him, </p>
<p class="poetry">and now that he is bedridden he will never recover.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:9</span> Even my close friend whom I trusted,</p>
<p class="poetry">he who shared meals with me, has turned against me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:10</span> As for you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have mercy on me and raise me up,</p>
<p class="poetry">so I can pay them back!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:11</span> By this I know that you are pleased with me,</p>
<p class="poetry">for my enemy does not triumph over me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:12</span> As for me, you uphold me because of my integrity; </p>
<p class="poetry">you allow me permanent access to your presence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel deserves praise </p>
<p class="poetry">in the future and forevermore. </p>
<p class="poetry">We agree! We agree! </p>

</body>
</html>