<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 148</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 148</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:1</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from the sky.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise him in the heavens. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:2</span> Praise him, all his angels. </p>
<p class="poetry">Praise him, all his heavenly assembly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:3</span> Praise him, O sun and moon.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise him, all you shiny stars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:4</span> Praise him, O highest heaven,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you waters above the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:5</span> Let them praise the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">for he gave the command and they came into existence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:6</span> He established them so they would endure; </p>
<p class="poetry">he issued a decree that will not be revoked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:7</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">you sea creatures and all you ocean depths, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:8</span> O fire and hail, snow and clouds, </p>
<p class="poetry">O stormy wind that carries out his orders, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:9</span> you mountains and all you hills,</p>
<p class="poetry">you fruit trees and all you cedars, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:10</span> you animals and all you cattle,</p>
<p class="poetry">you creeping things and birds, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:11</span> you kings of the earth and all you nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">you princes and all you leaders on the earth, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:12</span> you young men and young women,</p>
<p class="poetry">you elderly, along with you children. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:13</span> Let them praise the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">for his name alone is exalted;</p>
<p class="poetry">his majesty extends over the earth and sky. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">148:14</span> He has made his people victorious, </p>
<p class="poetry">and given all his loyal followers reason to praise—</p>
<p class="poetry">the Israelites, the people who are close to him. </p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>

</body>
</html>