<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 80</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 80</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>shushan-eduth</i> style; a psalm of Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:1</span> O Shepherd of Israel, pay attention,</p>
<p class="poetry">you who lead Joseph like a flock of sheep.</p>
<p class="poetry">You who sit enthroned above the cherubim, reveal your splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:2</span> In the sight of Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh reveal your power.</p>
<p class="poetry">Come and deliver us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:3</span> O God, restore us.</p>
<p class="poetry">Smile on us. Then we will be delivered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:4</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies, </p>
<p class="poetry">how long will you remain angry at your people while they pray to you? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:5</span> You have given them tears as food; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have made them drink tears by the measure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:6</span> You have made our neighbors dislike us, </p>
<p class="poetry">and our enemies insult us.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:7</span> O God of Heaven’s Armies, restore us.</p>
<p class="poetry">Smile on us. Then we will be delivered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:8</span> You uprooted a vine from Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">you drove out nations and transplanted it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:9</span> You cleared the ground for it; </p>
<p class="poetry">it took root, </p>
<p class="poetry">and filled the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:10</span> The mountains were covered by its shadow,</p>
<p class="poetry">the highest cedars by its branches. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:11</span> Its branches reached the Mediterranean Sea, </p>
<p class="poetry">and its shoots the Euphrates River. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:12</span> Why did you break down its walls, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that all who pass by pluck its fruit? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:13</span> The wild boars of the forest ruin it; </p>
<p class="poetry">the insects of the field feed on it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:14</span> O God of Heaven’s Armies, come back.</p>
<p class="poetry">Look down from heaven and take notice.</p>
<p class="poetry">Take care of this vine, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:15</span> the root your right hand planted,</p>
<p class="poetry">the shoot you made to grow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:16</span> It is burned and cut down.</p>
<p class="poetry">May those who did this die because you are displeased with them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:17</span> May you give support to the one you have chosen, </p>
<p class="poetry">to the one whom you raised up for yourself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:18</span> Then we will not turn away from you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Revive us and we will pray to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">80:19</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies, restore us.</p>
<p class="poetry">Smile on us. Then we will be delivered. </p>

</body>
</html>