<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Ideal King Establishes a Kingdom of Peace</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:1</span> A shoot will grow out of Jesse’s root stock,</p>
<p class="poetry">a bud will sprout from his roots. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s Spirit will rest on him —</p>
<p class="poetry">a Spirit that gives extraordinary wisdom, </p>
<p class="poetry">a Spirit that provides the ability to execute plans, </p>
<p class="poetry">a Spirit that produces absolute loyalty to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:3</span> He will take delight in obeying the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will not judge by mere appearances, </p>
<p class="poetry">or make decisions on the basis of hearsay. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:4</span> He will treat the poor fairly, </p>
<p class="poetry">and make right decisions for the downtrodden of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and order the wicked to be executed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:5</span> Justice will be like a belt around his waist,</p>
<p class="poetry">integrity will be like a belt around his hips. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:6</span> A wolf will reside with a lamb,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a leopard will lie down with a young goat;</p>
<p class="poetry">an ox and a young lion will graze together, </p>
<p class="poetry">as a small child leads them along.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:7</span> A cow and a bear will graze together,</p>
<p class="poetry">their young will lie down together. </p>
<p class="poetry">A lion, like an ox, will eat straw. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:8</span> A baby will play </p>
<p class="poetry">over the hole of a snake; </p>
<p class="poetry">over the nest of a serpent</p>
<p class="poetry">an infant will put his hand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:9</span> They will no longer injure or destroy</p>
<p class="poetry">on my entire royal mountain. </p>
<p class="poetry">For there will be universal submission to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sovereignty,</p>
<p class="poetry">just as the waters completely cover the sea. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel is Reclaimed and Reunited</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:10</span> At that time a root from Jesse will stand like a signal flag for the nations. Nations will look to him for guidance, and his residence will be majestic. <span class="verse">11:11</span> At that time the Lord will again lift his hand to reclaim the remnant of his people from Assyria, Egypt, Pathros, Cush, Elam, Shinar, Hamath, and the seacoasts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:12</span> He will lift a signal flag for the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will gather Israel’s dispersed people </p>
<p class="poetry">and assemble Judah’s scattered people</p>
<p class="poetry">from the four corners of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:13</span> Ephraim’s jealousy will end, </p>
<p class="poetry">and Judah’s hostility will be eliminated.</p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim will no longer be jealous of Judah,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Judah will no longer be hostile toward Ephraim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:14</span> They will swoop down on the Philistine hills to the west; </p>
<p class="poetry">together they will loot the people of the east.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will take over Edom and Moab, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the Ammonites will be their subjects. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:15</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will divide the gulf of the Egyptian Sea; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will wave his hand over the Euphrates River and send a strong wind; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will turn it into seven dried-up streams, </p>
<p class="poetry">and enable them to walk across in their sandals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:16</span> There will be a highway leading out of Assyria</p>
<p class="poetry">for the remnant of his people, </p>
<p class="poetry">just as there was for Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">when they went up from the land of Egypt. </p>

</body>
</html>