<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Kings 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Kings<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’s</span> message against Baasha came to Jehu son of Hanani: <span class="verse">16:2</span> “I raised you up from the dust and made you ruler over my people Israel. Yet you followed in Jeroboam’s footsteps and encouraged my people Israel to sin; their sins have made me angry. <span class="verse">16:3</span> So I am ready to burn up Baasha and his family, and make your family like the family of Jeroboam son of Nebat. <span class="verse">16:4</span> Dogs will eat the members of Baasha’s family who die in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat the ones who die in the country.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:5</span> The rest of the events of Baasha’s reign, including his accomplishments and successes, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel. <span class="verse">16:6</span> Baasha passed away and was buried in Tirzah. His son Elah replaced him as king. <span class="verse">16:7</span> And so it was the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came through the prophet Jehu son of Hanani against Baasha and his family. This was because of all the evil he had done in the <span class="smcaps">Lord’s</span> view, by angering him with his deeds and becoming like Jeroboam’s dynasty, and because of how he had destroyed Jeroboam’s dynasty. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elah’s Reign over Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:8</span> In the twenty-sixth year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Baasha’s son Elah became king over Israel; he ruled in Tirzah for two years. <span class="verse">16:9</span> His servant Zimri, a commander of half of his chariot force, conspired against him. While Elah was in Tirzah drinking heavily at the house of Arza, who supervised the palace in Tirzah, <span class="verse">16:10</span> Zimri came in and struck him dead. (This happened in the twenty-seventh year of Asa’s reign over Judah.) Zimri replaced Elah as king. <span class="verse">16:11</span> When he became king and occupied the throne, he killed Baasha’s entire family. He did not spare any male belonging to him; he killed his relatives and his friends. <span class="verse">16:12</span> Zimri destroyed Baasha’s entire family, in keeping with the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message which he had spoken against Baasha through Jehu the prophet. <span class="verse">16:13</span> This happened because of all the sins which Baasha and his son Elah committed and which they made Israel commit. They angered the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel with their worthless idols. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:14</span> The rest of the events of Elah’s reign, including all his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Zimri’s Reign over Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:15</span> In the twenty-seventh year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Zimri became king over Israel; he ruled for seven days in Tirzah. Zimri’s revolt took place while the army was deployed in Gibbethon, which was in Philistine territory. <span class="verse">16:16</span> While deployed there, the army received this report: “Zimri has conspired against the king and assassinated him.” So all Israel made Omri, the commander of the army, king over Israel that very day in the camp. <span class="verse">16:17</span> Omri and all Israel went up from Gibbethon and besieged Tirzah. <span class="verse">16:18</span> When Zimri saw that the city was captured, he went into the fortified area of the royal palace. He set the palace on fire and died in the flames. <span class="verse">16:19</span> This happened because of the sins he committed. He did evil in the sight of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and followed in Jeroboam’s footsteps and encouraged Israel to continue sinning. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:20</span> The rest of the events of Zimri’s reign, including the details of his revolt, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Omri’s Reign over Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:21</span> At that time the people of Israel were divided in their loyalties. Half the people supported Tibni son of Ginath and wanted to make him king; the other half supported Omri. <span class="verse">16:22</span> Omri’s supporters were stronger than those who supported Tibni son of Ginath. Tibni died; Omri became king. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:23</span> In the thirty-first year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Omri became king over Israel. He ruled for twelve years, six of them in Tirzah. <span class="verse">16:24</span> He purchased the hill of Samaria from Shemer for two talents of silver. He launched a construction project there and named the city he built after Shemer, the former owner of the hill of Samaria. <span class="verse">16:25</span> Omri did more evil in the sight of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> than all who were before him. <span class="verse">16:26</span> He followed in the footsteps of Jeroboam son of Nebat and encouraged Israel to sin; they angered the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel with their worthless idols. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:27</span> The rest of the events of Omri’s reign, including his accomplishments and successes, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel. <span class="verse">16:28</span> Omri passed away and was buried in Samaria. His son Ahab replaced him as king. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ahab Promotes Idolatry</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:29</span> In the thirty-eighth year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Omri’s son Ahab became king over Israel. Ahab son of Omri ruled over Israel for twenty-two years in Samaria. <span class="verse">16:30</span> Ahab son of Omri did more evil in the sight of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> than all who were before him. <span class="verse">16:31</span> As if following in the sinful footsteps of Jeroboam son of Nebat were not bad enough, he married Jezebel the daughter of King Ethbaal of the Sidonians. Then he worshiped and bowed to Baal. <span class="verse">16:32</span> He set up an altar for Baal in the temple of Baal he had built in Samaria. <span class="verse">16:33</span> Ahab also made an Asherah pole; he did more to anger the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel than all the kings of Israel who were before him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:34</span> During Ahab’s reign, Hiel the Bethelite rebuilt Jericho. Abiram, his firstborn son, died when he laid the foundation; Segub, his youngest son, died when he erected its gates, in keeping with the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message that he had spoken through Joshua son of Nun. </p>

</body>
</html>