<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The First Collection of Solomonic Proverbs </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon:</p>
<p class="poetrybreak">A wise child makes a father rejoice, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a foolish child is a grief to his mother. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:2</span> Treasures gained by wickedness do not profit,</p>
<p class="poetry">but righteousness delivers from death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> satisfies the appetite of the righteous,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he thwarts the craving of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:4</span> The one who is lazy becomes poor, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who works diligently becomes wealthy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:5</span> The one who gathers crops in the summer is a wise son,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who sleeps during harvest is a shameful son. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:6</span> Blessings are on the head of the righteous,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the speech of the wicked conceals violence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:7</span> The memory of the righteous is a blessing,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the reputation of the wicked will rot. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:8</span> The wise person accepts instructions, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who speaks foolishness will come to ruin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:9</span> The one who conducts himself in integrity will live securely,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who behaves perversely will be found out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:10</span> The one who winks his eye causes trouble,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who speaks foolishness will come to ruin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:11</span> The speech of the righteous is a fountain of life, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the speech of the wicked conceals violence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:12</span> Hatred stirs up dissension,</p>
<p class="poetry">but love covers all transgressions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:13</span> Wisdom is found in the words of the discerning person, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who lacks sense will be disciplined. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:14</span> Those who are wise store up knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">but foolish speech leads to imminent destruction.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:15</span> The wealth of a rich person is like a fortified city, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the poor are brought to ruin by their poverty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:16</span> The reward that the righteous receive is life;</p>
<p class="poetry">the recompense that the wicked receive is judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:17</span> The one who heeds instruction is on the way to life,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who rejects rebuke goes astray. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:18</span> The one who conceals hatred utters lies, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who spreads slander is certainly a fool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:19</span> When words abound, transgression is inevitable, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who restrains his words is wise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:20</span> What the righteous say is like the best silver,</p>
<p class="poetry">but what the wicked think is of little value. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:21</span> The teaching of the righteous feeds many,</p>
<p class="poetry">but fools die for lack of sense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:22</span> The blessing from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>  makes a person rich, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he adds no sorrow to it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:23</span> Carrying out a wicked scheme is enjoyable to a fool,</p>
<p class="poetry">and so is wisdom for the one who has discernment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:24</span> What the wicked fears will come on him;</p>
<p class="poetry">what the righteous desire will be granted. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:25</span> When the storm passes through, the wicked are swept away, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the righteous are an everlasting foundation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:26</span> Like vinegar to the teeth and like smoke to the eyes, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is the sluggard to those who send him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:27</span> Fearing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> prolongs life, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the life span of the wicked will be shortened. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:28</span> The hope of the righteous is joy,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the expectation of the wicked perishes.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:29</span> The way of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is like a stronghold for the upright, </p>
<p class="poetry">but it is destruction to evildoers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:30</span> The righteous will never be moved,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the wicked will not inhabit the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:31</span> The speech of the righteous bears the fruit of wisdom, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who speaks perversion will be destroyed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:32</span> The lips of the righteous know what is pleasing, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the speech of the wicked is perverse. </p>

</body>
</html>