<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 55</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 55</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, to be accompanied by stringed instruments; a well-written song by David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:1</span> Listen, O God, to my prayer.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not ignore my appeal for mercy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:2</span> Pay attention to me and answer me.</p>
<p class="poetry">I am so upset and distressed, I am beside myself, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:3</span> because of what the enemy says, </p>
<p class="poetry">and because of how the wicked pressure me, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they hurl trouble down upon me </p>
<p class="poetry">and angrily attack me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:4</span> My heart beats violently within me;</p>
<p class="poetry">the horrors of death overcome me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:5</span> Fear and panic overpower me; </p>
<p class="poetry">terror overwhelms me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:6</span> I say, “I wish I had wings like a dove.</p>
<p class="poetry">I would fly away and settle in a safe place.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:7</span> Look, I will escape to a distant place;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will stay in the wilderness. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:8</span> I will hurry off to a place that is safe</p>
<p class="poetry">from the strong wind and the gale.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:9</span> Confuse them, O Lord.</p>
<p class="poetry">Frustrate their plans. </p>
<p class="poetry">For I see violence and conflict in the city. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:10</span> Day and night they walk around on its walls, </p>
<p class="poetry">while wickedness and destruction are within it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:11</span> Disaster is within it;</p>
<p class="poetry">violence and deceit do not depart from its public square. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:12</span> Indeed, it is not an enemy who insults me,</p>
<p class="poetry">or else I could bear it;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is not one who hates me who arrogantly taunts me, </p>
<p class="poetry">or else I could hide from him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:13</span> But it is you, a man like me, </p>
<p class="poetry">my close friend in whom I confided. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:14</span> We would share personal thoughts with each other; </p>
<p class="poetry">in God’s temple we would walk together among the crowd. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:15</span> May death destroy them. </p>
<p class="poetry">May they go down alive into Sheol. </p>
<p class="poetry">For evil is in their dwelling place and in their midst. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:16</span> As for me, I will call out to God,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will deliver me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:17</span> During the evening, morning, and noontime</p>
<p class="poetry">I will lament and moan, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he will hear me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:18</span> He will rescue me and protect me from those who attack me, </p>
<p class="poetry">even though they greatly outnumber me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:19</span> God, the one who has reigned as king from long ago,</p>
<p class="poetry">will hear and humiliate them. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry">They refuse to change,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not fear God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:20</span> He attacks his friends; </p>
<p class="poetry">he breaks his solemn promises to them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:21</span> His words are as smooth as butter, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he harbors animosity in his heart. </p>
<p class="poetry">His words seem softer than oil,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they are really like sharp swords. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:22</span> Throw your burden upon the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he will sustain you. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will never allow the godly to be shaken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:23</span> But you, O God, will bring them down to the deep Pit. </p>
<p class="poetry">Violent and deceitful people will not live even half a normal lifespan. </p>
<p class="poetry">But as for me, I trust in you. </p>

</body>
</html>