<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Gibeonites Deceive Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> When the news reached all the kings on the west side of the Jordan —in the hill country, the foothills, and all along the Mediterranean coast as far as Lebanon (including the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites)— <span class="verse">9:2</span> they formed an alliance to fight against Joshua and Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:3</span> When the residents of Gibeon heard what Joshua did to Jericho and Ai, <span class="verse">9:4</span> they did something clever. They collected some provisions and put worn-out sacks on their donkeys, along with worn-out wineskins that were ripped and patched. <span class="verse">9:5</span> They had worn-out, patched sandals on their feet and dressed in worn-out clothes. All their bread was dry and hard. <span class="verse">9:6</span> They came to Joshua at the camp in Gilgal and said to him and the men of Israel, “We have come from a distant land. Make a treaty with us.” <span class="verse">9:7</span> The men of Israel said to the Hivites, “Perhaps you live near us. So how can we make a treaty with you?” <span class="verse">9:8</span> But they said to Joshua, “We are willing to be your subjects.” So Joshua said to them, “Who are you and where do you come from?” <span class="verse">9:9</span> They told him, “Your subjects have come from a very distant land because of the reputation of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, for we have heard the news about all he did in Egypt <span class="verse">9:10</span> and all he did to the two Amorite kings on the other side of the Jordan—King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan in Ashtaroth. <span class="verse">9:11</span> Our leaders and all who live in our land told us, ‘Take provisions for your journey and go meet them. Tell them, “We are willing to be your subjects. Make a treaty with us.”’ <span class="verse">9:12</span> This bread of ours was warm when we packed it in our homes the day we started out to meet you, but now it is dry and hard. <span class="verse">9:13</span> These wineskins we filled were brand new, but look how they have ripped. Our clothes and sandals have worn out because it has been a very long journey.” <span class="verse">9:14</span> The men examined some of their provisions, but they failed to ask the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s advice. <span class="verse">9:15</span> Joshua made a peace treaty with them and agreed to let them live. The leaders of the community sealed it with an oath. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:16</span> Three days after they made the treaty with them, the Israelites found out they were from the local area and lived nearby. <span class="verse">9:17</span> So the Israelites set out and on the third day arrived at their cities—Gibeon, Kephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath Jearim. <span class="verse">9:18</span> The Israelites did not attack them because the leaders of the community had sworn an oath to them in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel. The whole community criticized the leaders, <span class="verse">9:19</span> but all the leaders told the whole community, “We swore an oath to them in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel! So now we can’t hurt them. <span class="verse">9:20</span> We must let them live so we can escape the curse attached to the oath we swore to them.” <span class="verse">9:21</span> The leaders then added, “Let them live.” So they became woodcutters and water carriers for the whole community, as the leaders had decided. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:22</span>  Joshua summoned the Gibeonites and said to them, “Why did you trick us by saying, ‘We live far away from you,’ when you really live nearby? <span class="verse">9:23</span> Now you are condemned to perpetual servitude as woodcutters and water carriers for the house of my God.” <span class="verse">9:24</span> They said to Joshua, “It was carefully reported to your subjects how the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God commanded Moses his servant to assign you the whole land and to destroy all who live in the land from before you. Because of you we were terrified we would lose our lives, so we did this thing. <span class="verse">9:25</span> So now we are in your power. Do to us what you think is good and appropriate.” <span class="verse">9:26</span> Joshua did as they said; he kept the Israelites from killing them <span class="verse">9:27</span> and that day made them woodcutters and water carriers for the community and for the altar of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at the divinely chosen site. (They continue in that capacity to this very day.) </p>

</body>
</html>