<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Death of Sarah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> Sarah lived 127 years. <span class="verse">23:2</span> Then she died in Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan. Abraham went to mourn for Sarah and to weep for her. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:3</span> Then Abraham got up from mourning his dead wife and said to the sons of Heth, <span class="verse">23:4</span> “I am a foreign resident, a temporary settler, among you. Grant me ownership of a burial site among you so that I may bury my dead.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:5</span> The sons of Heth answered Abraham, <span class="verse">23:6</span> “Listen, sir, you are a mighty prince among us! You may bury your dead in the choicest of our tombs. None of us will refuse you his tomb to prevent you from burying your dead.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:7</span> Abraham got up and bowed down to the local people, the sons of Heth. <span class="verse">23:8</span> Then he said to them, “If you agree that I may bury my dead, then hear me out. Ask Ephron the son of Zohar <span class="verse">23:9</span> if he will sell me the cave of Machpelah that belongs to him; it is at the end of his field. Let him sell it to me publicly for the full price, so that I may own it as a burial site.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:10</span> (Now Ephron was sitting among the sons of Heth.) Ephron the Hittite replied to Abraham in the hearing of the sons of Heth—before all who entered the gate of his city— <span class="verse">23:11</span> “No, my lord! Hear me out. I sell you both the field and the cave that is in it. In the presence of my people I sell it to you. Bury your dead.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:12</span> Abraham bowed before the local people <span class="verse">23:13</span> and said to Ephron in their hearing, “Hear me, if you will. I pay to you the price of the field. Take it from me so that I may bury my dead there.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:14</span> Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him, <span class="verse">23:15</span> “Hear me, my lord. The land is worth 400 pieces of silver, but what is that between me and you? So bury your dead.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:16</span> So Abraham agreed to Ephron’s price and weighed out for him the price that Ephron had quoted in the hearing of the sons of Heth—400 pieces of silver, according to the standard measurement at the time. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:17</span> So Abraham secured Ephron’s field in Machpelah, next to Mamre, including the field, the cave that was in it, and all the trees that were in the field and all around its border, <span class="verse">23:18</span> as his property in the presence of the sons of Heth before all who entered the gate of Ephron’s city. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:19</span> After this Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave in the field of Machpelah next to Mamre (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan. <span class="verse">23:20</span> So Abraham secured the field and the cave that was in it as a burial site from the sons of Heth. </p>

</body>
</html>