<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> He said to me, “Son of man, eat what you see in front of you —eat this scroll—and then go and speak to the house of Israel.” <span class="verse">3:2</span> So I opened my mouth and he fed me the scroll. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:3</span> He said to me, “Son of man, feed your stomach and fill your belly with this scroll I am giving to you.” So I ate it, and it was sweet like honey in my mouth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:4</span> He said to me, “Son of man, go to the house of Israel and speak my words to them. <span class="verse">3:5</span> For you are not being sent to a people of unintelligible speech and difficult language, but to the house of Israel— <span class="verse">3:6</span> not to many peoples of unintelligible speech and difficult language, whose words you cannot understand. Surely if I had sent you to them, they would listen to you! <span class="verse">3:7</span> But the house of Israel is unwilling to listen to you, because they are not willing to listen to me, for the whole house of Israel is hardheaded and hardhearted. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:8</span> “I have made your face adamant to match their faces, and your forehead hard to match their foreheads. <span class="verse">3:9</span> I have made your forehead harder than flint—like diamond! Do not fear them or be terrified of the looks they give you, for they are a rebellious house.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:10</span> And he said to me, “Son of man, take all my words that I speak to you to heart and listen carefully. <span class="verse">3:11</span> Go to the exiles, to your fellow countrymen, and speak to them. Say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says,’ whether they pay attention or not.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ezekiel Before the Exiles</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Then a wind lifted me up and I heard a great rumbling sound behind me as the glory of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rose from its place, <span class="verse">3:13</span> and the sound of the living beings’ wings brushing against each other, and the sound of the wheels alongside them, a great rumbling sound. <span class="verse">3:14</span> A wind lifted me up and carried me away. I went bitterly, my spirit full of fury, and the hand of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rested powerfully on me. <span class="verse">3:15</span> I came to the exiles at Tel Abib, who lived by the Kebar River. I sat dumbfounded among them there, where they were living, for seven days. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:16</span> At the end of seven days the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">3:17</span> “Son of man, I have appointed you a watchman for the house of Israel. Whenever you hear a word from my mouth, you must give them a warning from me. <span class="verse">3:18</span> When I say to the wicked, ‘You will certainly die,’ and you do not warn him—you do not speak out to warn the wicked to turn from his wicked lifestyle so that he may live—that wicked person will die for his iniquity, but I will hold you accountable for his death. <span class="verse">3:19</span> But as for you, if you warn the wicked and he does not turn from his wicked deed and from his wicked lifestyle, he will die for his iniquity but you will have saved your own life. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:20</span> “When a righteous person turns from his righteousness and commits iniquity, and I set an obstacle before him, he will die. If you have not warned him, he will die for his sin. The righteous deeds he performed will not be considered, but I will hold you accountable for his death. <span class="verse">3:21</span> However, if you warn the righteous person not to sin, and he does not sin, he will certainly live because he was warned, and you will have saved your own life.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Isolated and Silenced</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:22</span> The hand of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rested on me there, and he said to me, “Get up, go out to the valley, and I will speak with you there.” <span class="verse">3:23</span> So I got up and went out to the valley, and the glory of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was standing there, just like the glory I had seen by the Kebar River, and I threw myself face down. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:24</span> Then a wind came into me and stood me on my feet. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to me and said, “Go shut yourself in your house. <span class="verse">3:25</span> As for you, son of man, they will put ropes on you and tie you up with them, so you cannot go out among them. <span class="verse">3:26</span> I will make your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth so that you will be silent and unable to reprove them, for they are a rebellious house. <span class="verse">3:27</span> But when I speak with you, I will loosen your tongue and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says.’ Those who listen will listen, but the indifferent will refuse, for they are a rebellious house. </p>

</body>
</html>