<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 26</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 26</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Uzziah’s Reign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:1</span> All the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in his father Amaziah’s place. <span class="verse">26:2</span> Uzziah built up Elat and restored it to Judah after King Amaziah had passed away. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:3</span> Uzziah was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecholiah, who was from Jerusalem. <span class="verse">26:4</span> He did what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> approved, just as his father Amaziah had done. <span class="verse">26:5</span> He followed God during the lifetime of Zechariah, who taught him how to honor God. As long as he followed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, God caused him to succeed. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:6</span> Uzziah attacked the Philistines and broke down the walls of Gath, Jabneh, and Ashdod. He built cities in the region of Ashdod and throughout Philistine territory. <span class="verse">26:7</span> God helped him in his campaigns against the Philistines, the Arabs living in Gur Baal, and the Meunites. <span class="verse">26:8</span> The Ammonites paid tribute to Uzziah and his fame reached the border of Egypt, for he grew in power. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:9</span> Uzziah built and fortified towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate, Valley Gate, and at the Angle. <span class="verse">26:10</span> He built towers in the wilderness and dug many cisterns, for he owned many herds in the foothills and on the plain. He had workers in the fields and vineyards in the hills and in Carmel, for he loved agriculture. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:11</span> Uzziah had an army of skilled warriors trained for battle. They were organized by divisions according to the muster rolls made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer under the authority of Hananiah, a royal official. <span class="verse">26:12</span> The total number of family leaders who led warriors was 2,600. <span class="verse">26:13</span> They commanded an army of 307,500 skilled and able warriors who were ready to defend the king against his enemies. <span class="verse">26:14</span> Uzziah supplied shields, spears, helmets, breastplates, bows, and slingstones for the entire army. <span class="verse">26:15</span> In Jerusalem he made war machines carefully designed to shoot arrows and large stones from the towers and corners of the walls. He became very famous, for he received tremendous support and became powerful. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:16</span> But once he became powerful, his pride destroyed him. He disobeyed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God. He entered the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple to offer incense on the incense altar. <span class="verse">26:17</span> Azariah the priest and eighty other brave priests of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> followed him in. <span class="verse">26:18</span> They confronted King Uzziah and said to him, “It is not proper for you, Uzziah, to offer incense to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. That is the responsibility of the priests, the descendants of Aaron, who are consecrated to offer incense. Leave the sanctuary, for you have disobeyed and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God will not honor you!” <span class="verse">26:19</span> Uzziah, who had an incense censer in his hand, became angry. While he was ranting and raving at the priests, a skin disease appeared on his forehead right there in front of the priests in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple near the incense altar. <span class="verse">26:20</span> When Azariah the high priest and the other priests looked at him, there was a skin disease on his forehead. They hurried him out of there; even the king himself wanted to leave quickly because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had afflicted him. <span class="verse">26:21</span> King Uzziah suffered from a skin disease until the day he died. He lived in separate quarters, afflicted by a skin disease and banned from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. His son Jotham was in charge of the palace and ruled over the people of the land. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:22</span> The rest of the events of Uzziah’s reign, from start to finish, were recorded by the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz. <span class="verse">26:23</span> Uzziah passed away and was buried near his ancestors in a cemetery belonging to the kings. (This was because he had a skin disease.) His son Jotham replaced him as king. </p>

</body>
</html>