<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Consequences of Accepting Wisdom or Folly </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:1</span> Wisdom has built her house;</p>
<p class="poetry">she has carved out its seven pillars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:2</span> She has prepared her meat, she has mixed her wine;</p>
<p class="poetry">she also has arranged her table. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:3</span> She has sent out her female servants;</p>
<p class="poetry">she calls out on the highest places of the city. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:4</span> “Whoever is naive, let him turn in here.”</p>
<p class="poetry">To those who lack understanding, she has said, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:5</span> “Come, eat some of my food,</p>
<p class="poetry">and drink some of the wine I have mixed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:6</span> Abandon your foolish ways so that you may live, </p>
<p class="poetry">and proceed in the way of understanding.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:7</span> Whoever corrects a mocker is asking for insult; </p>
<p class="poetry">whoever reproves a wicked person receives abuse. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:8</span> Do not reprove a mocker or he will hate you;</p>
<p class="poetry">reprove a wise person and he will love you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:9</span> Give instruction to a wise person, and he will become wiser still;</p>
<p class="poetry">teach a righteous person and he will add to his learning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:10</span> The beginning of wisdom is to fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">and acknowledging the Holy One is understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:11</span> For because of me your days will be many,</p>
<p class="poetry">and years will be added to your life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:12</span> If you are wise, you are wise to your own advantage, </p>
<p class="poetry">but if you have mocked, you alone must bear it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:13</span> The woman called Folly is brash, </p>
<p class="poetry">she is naive and does not know anything. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:14</span> And she has sat down at the door of her house,</p>
<p class="poetry">on a seat at the highest point of the city,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:15</span> calling out to those who are passing by her in the way, </p>
<p class="poetry">who go straight on their way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:16</span> “Whoever is naive, let him turn in here,”</p>
<p class="poetry">To those who lack understanding she has said, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:17</span> “Stolen waters are sweet,</p>
<p class="poetry">and food obtained in secret is pleasant!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:18</span> But they do not realize that the dead are there,</p>
<p class="poetry">that her guests are in the depths of the grave. </p>

</body>
</html>