<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you are my God! </p>
<p class="poetry">I will exalt you in praise, I will extol your fame. </p>
<p class="poetry">For you have done extraordinary things,</p>
<p class="poetry">and executed plans made long ago exactly as you decreed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:2</span> Indeed, you have made the city into a heap of rubble,</p>
<p class="poetry">the fortified town into a heap of ruins;</p>
<p class="poetry">the fortress of foreigners is no longer a city,</p>
<p class="poetry">it will never be rebuilt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:3</span> So a strong nation will extol you;</p>
<p class="poetry">the towns of powerful nations will fear you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:4</span> For you are a protector for the poor,</p>
<p class="poetry">a protector for the needy in their distress,</p>
<p class="poetry">a shelter from the rainstorm,</p>
<p class="poetry">a shade from the heat.</p>
<p class="poetry">Though the breath of tyrants is like a winter rainstorm, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:5</span> like heat in a dry land,</p>
<p class="poetry">you humble the boasting foreigners. </p>
<p class="poetry">Just as the shadow of a cloud causes the heat to subside, </p>
<p class="poetry">so he causes the song of tyrants to cease. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies will hold a banquet for all the nations on this mountain. </p>
<p class="poetry">At this banquet there will be plenty of meat and aged wine—</p>
<p class="poetry">tender meat and choicest wine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:7</span> On this mountain he will swallow up </p>
<p class="poetry">the shroud that is over all the peoples, </p>
<p class="poetry">the woven covering that is over all the nations; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:8</span> he will swallow up death permanently. </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will wipe away the tears from every face,</p>
<p class="poetry">and remove his people’s disgrace from all the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has announced it! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:9</span> At that time they will say, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Look, here is our God!</p>
<p class="poetry">We waited for him, and he delivered us.</p>
<p class="poetry">Here is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! We waited for him.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let’s rejoice and celebrate his deliverance!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:10</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s power will make this mountain secure. </p>
<p class="poetry">Moab will be trampled down where it stands, </p>
<p class="poetry">as a heap of straw is trampled down in a manure pile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:11</span> Moab will spread out its hands in the middle of it, </p>
<p class="poetry">just as a swimmer spreads his hands to swim; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will bring down Moab’s pride as it spreads its hands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:12</span> The fortified city (along with the very tops of your walls) he will knock down,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will bring it down, he will throw it down to the dusty ground. </p>

</body>
</html>