<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Baal Worshipers and Calf Worshipers to be Destroyed</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:1</span> When Ephraim spoke, there was terror; </p>
<p class="poetry">he was exalted in Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he became guilty by worshiping Baal and died. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:2</span> Even now they persist in sin! </p>
<p class="poetry">They make metal images for themselves,</p>
<p class="poetry">idols that they skillfully fashion from their own silver;</p>
<p class="poetry">all of them are nothing but the work of craftsmen.</p>
<p class="poetry">There is a saying about them: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Those who sacrifice to the calf idol are calf kissers!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:3</span> Therefore they will disappear like the morning mist, </p>
<p class="poetry">like early morning dew that evaporates, </p>
<p class="poetry">like chaff that is blown away from a threshing floor,</p>
<p class="poetry">like smoke that disappears through an open window. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Well-Fed Israel Will Be Fed to Wild Animals</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:4</span> But I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">who brought you out of Egypt.</p>
<p class="poetry">Therefore, you must not acknowledge any God but me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Except for me there is no Savior. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:5</span> I cared for you in the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the dry desert where no water was. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:6</span> When they were fed, they became satisfied;</p>
<p class="poetry">when they were satisfied, they became proud; </p>
<p class="poetry">as a result, they forgot me!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:7</span> So I will pounce on them like a lion; </p>
<p class="poetry">like a leopard I will lurk by the path. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:8</span> I will attack them like a bear robbed of her cubs—</p>
<p class="poetry">I will rip open their chests.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will devour them there like a lion—</p>
<p class="poetry">like a wild animal would tear them apart. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s King Unable to Deliver the Nation</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:9</span> I will destroy you, O Israel!</p>
<p class="poetry">Who is there to help you?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:10</span> Where then is your king, </p>
<p class="poetry">that he may save you in all your cities?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where are your rulers for whom you asked, saying,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Give me a king and princes”? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:11</span> I granted you a king in my anger,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will take him away in my wrath! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s Punishment Will Not Be Withheld Much Longer</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:12</span> The punishment of Ephraim has been decreed; </p>
<p class="poetry">his punishment is being stored up for the future.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:13</span> The labor pains of a woman will overtake him,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the baby will lack wisdom;</p>
<p class="poetry">when the time arrives,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will not come out of the womb! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Not Relent from the Threatened Judgment</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:14</span> Will I deliver them from the power of Sheol? No, I will not! </p>
<p class="poetry">Will I redeem them from death? No, I will not!</p>
<p class="poetry">O Death, bring on your plagues! </p>
<p class="poetry">O Sheol, bring on your destruction! </p>
<p class="poetry">My eyes will not show any compassion! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Capital of the Northern Empire Will Be Destroyed</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:15</span> Even though he flourishes like a reed plant, </p>
<p class="poetry">a scorching east wind will come,</p>
<p class="poetry">a wind from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rising up from the desert.</p>
<p class="poetry">As a result, his spring will dry up; </p>
<p class="poetry">his well will become dry.</p>
<p class="poetry">That wind will spoil all his delightful foods</p>
<p class="poetry">in the containers in his storehouse. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:16</span> (14:1) Samaria will be held guilty, </p>
<p class="poetry">because she rebelled against her God.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will fall by the sword;</p>
<p class="poetry">their infants will be dashed to the ground—</p>
<p class="poetry">their pregnant women will be ripped open.</p>

</body>
</html>