<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 36</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 36</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu’s Fourth Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">36:1</span> Elihu said further: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:2</span> “Be patient with me a little longer</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will instruct you,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I still have words to speak on God’s behalf. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:3</span> With my knowledge I will speak comprehensively, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to my Creator I will ascribe righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:4</span> For in truth, my words are not false;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is one complete in knowledge </p>
<p class="poetry">who is with you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:5</span> Indeed, God is mighty; and he does not despise people, </p>
<p class="poetry">he is mighty, and firm in his intent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:6</span> He does not allow the wicked to live, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he gives justice to the poor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:7</span> He does not take his eyes off the righteous;</p>
<p class="poetry">but with kings on the throne </p>
<p class="poetry">he seats the righteous and exalts them forever. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:8</span> But if they are bound in chains, </p>
<p class="poetry">and held captive by the cords of affliction, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:9</span> then he reveals to them what they have done, </p>
<p class="poetry">and their transgressions, </p>
<p class="poetry">that they were behaving proudly.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:10</span> And he reveals this for correction,</p>
<p class="poetry">and says that they must turn from evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:11</span> If they obey and serve him,</p>
<p class="poetry">they live out their days in prosperity</p>
<p class="poetry">and their years in pleasantness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:12</span> But if they refuse to listen,</p>
<p class="poetry">they pass over the river of death, </p>
<p class="poetry">and expire without knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:13</span> The godless at heart nourish anger, </p>
<p class="poetry">they do not cry out even when he binds them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:14</span> They die in their youth,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their life ends among the male cultic prostitutes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:15</span> He delivers the afflicted by their afflictions,</p>
<p class="poetry">he reveals himself to them by their suffering. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:16</span> And surely, he drew you from the mouth of distress,</p>
<p class="poetry">to a wide place, unrestricted, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to the comfort of your table</p>
<p class="poetry">filled with rich food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:17</span> But now you are preoccupied with the judgment due the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">judgment and justice take hold of you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:18</span> Be careful that no one entices you with riches;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not let a large bribe turn you aside. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:19</span> Would your wealth sustain you,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that you would not be in distress, </p>
<p class="poetry">even all your mighty efforts? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:20</span> Do not long for the cover of night</p>
<p class="poetry">to drag people away from their homes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:21</span> Take heed, do not turn to evil,</p>
<p class="poetry">for because of this you have been tested by affliction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:22</span> Indeed, God is exalted in his power;</p>
<p class="poetry">who is a teacher like him? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:23</span> Who has prescribed his ways for him?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or said to him, ‘You have done what is wicked’? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:24</span> Remember to extol his work,</p>
<p class="poetry">which people have praised in song.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:25</span> All humanity has seen it;</p>
<p class="poetry">people gaze on it from afar. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Work and Wisdom of God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:26</span> “Yes, God is great—beyond our knowledge! </p>
<p class="poetry">The number of his years is unsearchable. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:27</span> He draws up drops of water;</p>
<p class="poetry">they distill the rain into its mist, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:28</span> which the clouds pour down</p>
<p class="poetry">and shower on humankind abundantly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:29</span> Who can understand the spreading of the clouds,</p>
<p class="poetry">the thunderings of his pavilion? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:30</span> See how he scattered his lightning about him;</p>
<p class="poetry">he has covered the depths of the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:31</span> It is by these that he judges the nations</p>
<p class="poetry">and supplies food in abundance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:32</span> With his hands he covers the lightning,</p>
<p class="poetry">and directs it against its target. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:33</span>  His thunder announces the coming storm,</p>
<p class="poetry">the cattle also, concerning the storm’s approach. </p>

</body>
</html>