<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Admonition to Avoid the Wiles of the Adulteress </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:1</span> My child, devote yourself to my words</p>
<p class="poetry">and store up my commands inside yourself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:2</span> Keep my commands so that you may live, </p>
<p class="poetry">and obey my instruction as your most prized possession. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:3</span> Bind them on your forearm; </p>
<p class="poetry">write them on the tablet of your heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:4</span> Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” </p>
<p class="poetry">and call understanding a close relative, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:5</span> so that they may keep you from the adulterous woman, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the loose woman who has flattered you with her words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:6</span> For at the window of my house</p>
<p class="poetry">through my window lattice I looked out</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> and I saw among the naive —</p>
<p class="poetry">I discerned among the youths —</p>
<p class="poetry">a young man who lacked sense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:8</span> He was passing by the street near her corner,</p>
<p class="poetry">making his way along the road to her house </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> in the twilight, the evening, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the dark of the night. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:10</span> Suddenly a woman came out to meet him!</p>
<p class="poetry">She was dressed like a prostitute and with secret intent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:11</span> (She is loud and rebellious,</p>
<p class="poetry">she does not remain at home—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:12</span> at one time outside, at another in the wide plazas,</p>
<p class="poetry">and by every corner she lies in wait.) </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:13</span> So she grabbed him and kissed him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and with a bold expression she said to him,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:14</span> “I have meat from my peace offerings at home; </p>
<p class="poetry">today I have fulfilled my vows! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:15</span> That is why I came out to meet you,</p>
<p class="poetry">to look for you, and I found you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:16</span> I have spread my bed with elegant coverings, </p>
<p class="poetry">with richly colored fabric from Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:17</span> I have perfumed my bed </p>
<p class="poetry">with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:18</span> Come, let’s drink deeply of lovemaking until morning,</p>
<p class="poetry">let’s delight ourselves with love’s pleasures.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:19</span> For my husband is not at home; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has gone on a journey of some distance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:20</span> He has taken a bag of money with him; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will not return until the end of the month.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:21</span> She turned him aside with her persuasions; </p>
<p class="poetry">with her smooth talk she was enticing him along. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:22</span> Suddenly he was going after her</p>
<p class="poetry">like an ox that goes to the slaughter,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a stag prancing into a trapper’s snare </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:23</span> till an arrow pierces his liver —</p>
<p class="poetry">like a bird hurrying into a trap,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he does not know that it will cost him his life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:24</span> So now, sons, listen to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and pay attention to the words I speak. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:25</span> Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways—</p>
<p class="poetry">do not wander into her pathways; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:26</span> for she has brought down many fatally wounded,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all those she has slain are many. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:27</span> Her house is the way to the grave, </p>
<p class="poetry">going down to the chambers of death. </p>

</body>
</html>