<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Habakkuk 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Habakkuk<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">2:1</span> I will stand at my watch post;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will remain stationed on the city wall. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will keep watching so I can see what he says to me</p>
<p class="poetry">and can know how I should answer</p>
<p class="poetry">when he counters my argument. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Assures Habakkuk</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> responded: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Write down this message. </p>
<p class="poetry">Record it legibly on tablets</p>
<p class="poetry">so the one who announces it may read it easily. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> For the message is a witness to what is decreed; </p>
<p class="poetry">it gives reliable testimony about how matters will turn out. </p>
<p class="poetry">Even if the message is not fulfilled right away, wait patiently; </p>
<p class="poetry">for it will certainly come to pass—it will not arrive late. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> Look, the one whose desires are not upright will faint from exhaustion, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the person of integrity will live because of his faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> Indeed, wine will betray the proud, restless man! </p>
<p class="poetry">His appetite is as big as Sheol’s; </p>
<p class="poetry">like death, he is never satisfied.</p>
<p class="poetry">He gathers all the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">he seizes all peoples. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Proud Babylonians Are as Good as Dead</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> “But all these nations will someday taunt him </p>
<p class="poetry">and ridicule him with proverbial sayings: </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Woe to the one who accumulates what does not belong to him </p>
<p class="poetry">(How long will this go on?) —</p>
<p class="poetry">he who gets rich by extortion!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> Your creditors will suddenly attack; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who terrify you will spring into action, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they will rob you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Because you robbed many countries, </p>
<p class="poetry">all who are left among the nations will rob you.</p>
<p class="poetry">You have shed human blood </p>
<p class="poetry">and committed violent acts against lands, cities, and those who live in them.</p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">2:9</span> The one who builds his house by unjust gain is as good as dead. </p>
<p class="poetry">He does this so he can build his nest way up high</p>
<p class="poetry">and escape the clutches of disaster. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> Your schemes will bring shame to your house.</p>
<p class="poetry">Because you destroyed many nations, you will self-destruct. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> For the stones in the walls will cry out,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the wooden rafters will answer back. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">2:12</span> Woe to the one who builds a city by bloodshed—</p>
<p class="poetry">he who starts a town by unjust deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> Be sure of this! The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has decreed:</p>
<p class="poetry">The nations’ efforts will go up in smoke; </p>
<p class="poetry">their exhausting work will be for nothing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> For recognition of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sovereign majesty will fill the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">just as the waters fill up the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">2:15</span> “Woe to you who force your neighbor to drink wine —</p>
<p class="poetry">you who make others intoxicated </p>
<p class="poetry">by forcing them to drink from the bowl of your furious anger </p>
<p class="poetry">so you can look at their naked bodies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> But you will become drunk with shame, not majesty. </p>
<p class="poetry">Now it is your turn to drink and expose your uncircumcised foreskin! </p>
<p class="poetry">The cup of wine in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s right hand is coming to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and disgrace will replace your majestic glory! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:17</span> For you will pay in full for your violent acts against Lebanon; </p>
<p class="poetry">terrifying judgment will come upon you </p>
<p class="poetry">because of the way you destroyed the wild animals living there. </p>
<p class="poetry">You have shed human blood</p>
<p class="poetry">and committed violent acts against lands, cities, and those who live in them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:18</span> What good is an idol? Why would a craftsman make it? </p>
<p class="poetry">What good is a metal image that gives misleading oracles? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why would its creator place his trust in it </p>
<p class="poetry">and make such mute, worthless things? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:19</span> Woe to the one who says to wood, ‘Wake up!’—</p>
<p class="poetry">he who says to speechless stone, ‘Awake!’</p>
<p class="poetry">Can it give reliable guidance? </p>
<p class="poetry">It is overlaid with gold and silver;</p>
<p class="poetry">it has no life’s breath inside it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:20</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is in his majestic palace. </p>
<p class="poetry">The whole earth is speechless in his presence!” </p>

</body>
</html>