<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 45</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 45</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the tune of “Lilies”; by the Korahites, a well-written poem, a love song.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:1</span> My heart is stirred by a beautiful song. </p>
<p class="poetry">I say, “I have composed this special song for the king;</p>
<p class="poetry">my tongue is as skilled as the stylus of an experienced scribe.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:2</span> You are the most handsome of all men. </p>
<p class="poetry">You speak in an impressive and fitting manner. </p>
<p class="poetry">For this reason God grants you continual blessings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:3</span> Strap your sword to your thigh, O warrior. </p>
<p class="poetry">Appear in your majestic splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:4</span> Appear in your majesty and be victorious. </p>
<p class="poetry">Ride forth for the sake of what is right, </p>
<p class="poetry">on behalf of justice. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then your right hand will accomplish mighty acts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:5</span> Your arrows are sharp</p>
<p class="poetry">and penetrate the hearts of the king’s enemies.</p>
<p class="poetry">Nations fall at your feet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:6</span> Your throne, O God, is permanent. </p>
<p class="poetry">The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:7</span> You love justice and hate evil. </p>
<p class="poetry">For this reason God, your God, has anointed you </p>
<p class="poetry">with the oil of joy, elevating you above your companions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:8</span> All your garments are perfumed with myrrh, aloes, and cassia.</p>
<p class="poetry">From the luxurious palaces comes the music of stringed instruments that makes you happy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:9</span> Princesses are among your honored women. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your bride stands at your right hand, wearing jewelry made with gold from Ophir. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:10</span> Listen, O princess. </p>
<p class="poetry">Observe and pay attention! </p>
<p class="poetry">Forget your homeland and your family. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:11</span> Then the king will be attracted by your beauty.</p>
<p class="poetry">After all, he is your master. Submit to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:12</span> Rich people from Tyre </p>
<p class="poetry">will seek your favor by bringing a gift. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:13</span> The princess looks absolutely magnificent, </p>
<p class="poetry">decked out in pearls and clothed in a brocade trimmed with gold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:14</span> In embroidered robes she is escorted to the king.</p>
<p class="poetry">Her attendants, the maidens of honor who follow her,</p>
<p class="poetry">are led before you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:15</span> They are bubbling with joy as they walk in procession</p>
<p class="poetry">and enter the royal palace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:16</span> Your sons will carry on the dynasty of your ancestors; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will make them princes throughout the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">45:17</span> I will proclaim your greatness through the coming years, </p>
<p class="poetry">then the nations will praise you forever. </p>

</body>
</html>