<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 54</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 54</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Zion Will Be Secure</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:1</span> “Shout for joy, O barren one who has not given birth!</p>
<p class="poetry">Give a joyful shout and cry out, you who have not been in labor!</p>
<p class="poetry">For the children of the desolate one are more numerous</p>
<p class="poetry">than the children of the married woman,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:2</span> Make your tent larger,</p>
<p class="poetry">stretch your tent curtains farther out! </p>
<p class="poetry">Spare no effort,</p>
<p class="poetry">lengthen your ropes,</p>
<p class="poetry">and pound your stakes deep. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:3</span> For you will spread out to the right and to the left;</p>
<p class="poetry">your children will conquer nations</p>
<p class="poetry">and will resettle desolate cities. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:4</span> Don’t be afraid, for you will not be put to shame.</p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t be intimidated, for you will not be humiliated.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will forget about the shame you experienced in your youth;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will no longer remember the disgrace of your abandonment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:5</span> For your husband is the one who made you—</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies is his name.</p>
<p class="poetry">He is your Protector, the Holy One of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry">He is called “God of the entire earth.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:6</span> “Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will call you back</p>
<p class="poetry">like a wife who has been abandoned and suffers from depression, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a young wife when she has been rejected,” says your God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:7</span> “For a short time I abandoned you,</p>
<p class="poetry">but with great compassion I will gather you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:8</span> In a burst of anger I rejected you momentarily,</p>
<p class="poetry">but with lasting devotion I will have compassion on you,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says your Protector, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:9</span> “As far as I am concerned, this is like in Noah’s time, </p>
<p class="poetry">when I vowed that the waters of Noah’s flood would never again cover the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">In the same way I have vowed that I will not be angry at you or shout at you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:10</span> Even if the mountains are removed</p>
<p class="poetry">and the hills displaced,</p>
<p class="poetry">my devotion will not be removed from you,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor will my covenant of friendship be displaced,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the one who has compassion on you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:11</span> “O afflicted one, driven away, and unconsoled!</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, I am about to set your stones in antimony,</p>
<p class="poetry">and lay your foundation with lapis lazuli. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:12</span> I will make your pinnacles out of gems, </p>
<p class="poetry">your gates out of beryl, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your outer wall out of beautiful stones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:13</span> All your children will be followers of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your children will enjoy great prosperity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:14</span> You will be reestablished when I vindicate you. </p>
<p class="poetry">You will not experience oppression; </p>
<p class="poetry">indeed, you will not be afraid.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will not be terrified, </p>
<p class="poetry">for nothing frightening will come near you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:15</span> If anyone dares to challenge you, it will not be my doing!</p>
<p class="poetry">Whoever tries to challenge you will be defeated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:16</span> Look, I create the craftsman,</p>
<p class="poetry">who fans the coals into a fire</p>
<p class="poetry">and forges a weapon. </p>
<p class="poetry">I create the destroyer so he might devastate. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">54:17</span> No weapon forged to be used against you will succeed;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will refute everyone who tries to accuse you. </p>
<p class="poetry">This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will do for his servants—</p>
<p class="poetry">I will vindicate them,” </p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>