<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 145</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 145</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm of praise; by David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:1</span> I will extol you, my God, O King.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will praise your name continually. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:2</span> Every day I will praise you.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will praise your name continually. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is great and certainly worthy of praise.</p>
<p class="poetry">No one can fathom his greatness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:4</span> One generation will praise your deeds to another,</p>
<p class="poetry">and tell about your mighty acts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:5</span> I will focus on your honor and majestic splendor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your amazing deeds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:6</span> They will proclaim the power of your awesome acts.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will declare your great deeds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:7</span> They will talk about the fame of your great kindness, </p>
<p class="poetry">and sing about your justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is merciful and compassionate;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is patient and demonstrates great loyal love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is good to all,</p>
<p class="poetry">and has compassion on all he has made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:10</span> All your works will give thanks to you, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your loyal followers will praise you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:11</span> They will proclaim the splendor of your kingdom;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will tell about your power, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:12</span> so that mankind might acknowledge your mighty acts,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the majestic splendor of your kingdom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:13</span> Your kingdom is an eternal kingdom, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your dominion endures through all generations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:14</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> supports all who fall,</p>
<p class="poetry">and lifts up all who are bent over. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:15</span> Everything looks to you in anticipation, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you provide them with food on a regular basis. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:16</span> You open your hand,</p>
<p class="poetry">and fill every living thing with the food it desires. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:17</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is just in all his actions, </p>
<p class="poetry">and exhibits love in all he does. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is near all who cry out to him,</p>
<p class="poetry">all who cry out to him sincerely. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:19</span> He satisfies the desire of his loyal followers; </p>
<p class="poetry">he hears their cry for help and delivers them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:20</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protects all those who love him,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he destroys all the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">145:21</span> My mouth will praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let all who live praise his holy name forever. </p>

</body>
</html>