<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 18</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 18</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Provision for Priests and Levites</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:1</span> The Levitical priests —indeed, the entire tribe of Levi—will have no allotment or inheritance with Israel; they may eat the burnt offerings of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and of his inheritance. <span class="verse">18:2</span> They will have no inheritance in the midst of their fellow Israelites; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> alone is their inheritance, just as he had told them. <span class="verse">18:3</span> This shall be the priests’ fair allotment from the people who offer sacrifices, whether bull or sheep—they must give to the priest the shoulder, the jowls, and the stomach. <span class="verse">18:4</span> You must give them the best of your grain, new wine, and olive oil, as well as the best of your wool when you shear your flocks. <span class="verse">18:5</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God has chosen them and their sons from all your tribes to stand and serve in his name permanently. <span class="verse">18:6</span> Suppose a Levite comes by his own free will from one of your villages, from any part of Israel where he is living, to the place the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> chooses <span class="verse">18:7</span> and serves in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God like his fellow Levites who stand there before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">18:8</span> He must eat the same share they do, despite any profits he may gain from the sale of his family’s inheritance. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prohibited Occult Practices</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:9</span> When you enter the land the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is giving you, you must not learn the abhorrent practices of those nations. <span class="verse">18:10</span> There must never be found among you anyone who sacrifices his son or daughter in the fire, anyone who practices divination, an omen reader, a soothsayer, a sorcerer, <span class="verse">18:11</span> one who casts spells, one who conjures up spirits, a practitioner of the occult, or a necromancer. <span class="verse">18:12</span> Whoever does these things is abhorrent to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and because of these detestable things the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is about to drive them out from before you. <span class="verse">18:13</span> You must be blameless before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. <span class="verse">18:14</span> Those nations that you are about to dispossess listen to omen readers and diviners, but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God has not given you permission to do such things.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:15</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among you—from your fellow Israelites; you must listen to him. <span class="verse">18:16</span> This accords with what happened at Horeb in the day of the assembly. You asked the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God: “Please do not make us hear the voice of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God anymore or see this great fire anymore lest we die.” <span class="verse">18:17</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> then said to me, “What they have said is good. <span class="verse">18:18</span> I will raise up a prophet like you for them from among their fellow Israelites. I will put my words in his mouth and he will speak to them whatever I command. <span class="verse">18:19</span> I will personally hold responsible anyone who then pays no attention to the words that prophet speaks in my name. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:20</span> “But if any prophet presumes to speak anything in my name that I have not authorized him to speak, or speaks in the name of other gods, that prophet must die. <span class="verse">18:21</span> Now if you say to yourselves, ‘How can we tell that a message is not from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?’ — <span class="verse">18:22</span> whenever a prophet speaks in my name and the prediction is not fulfilled, then I have not spoken it; the prophet has presumed to speak it, so you need not fear him.”</p>

</body>
</html>