<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to Eliphaz </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:1</span> Then Job replied: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:2</span> “I have heard many things like these before.</p>
<p class="poetry">What miserable comforters are you all! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:3</span> Will there be an end to your windy words? </p>
<p class="poetry">Or what provokes you that you answer? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:4</span> I also could speak like you,</p>
<p class="poetry">if you were in my place;</p>
<p class="poetry">I could pile up words against you</p>
<p class="poetry">and I could shake my head at you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:5</span> But I would strengthen you with my words; </p>
<p class="poetry">comfort from my lips would bring you relief. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Abandonment by God and Man</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:6</span> “But if I speak, my pain is not relieved, </p>
<p class="poetry">and if I refrain from speaking,</p>
<p class="poetry">how much of it goes away? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:7</span> Surely now he has worn me out,</p>
<p class="poetry">you have devastated my entire household. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:8</span> You have seized me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it has become a witness;</p>
<p class="poetry">my leanness has risen up against me </p>
<p class="poetry">and testifies against me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:9</span> His anger has torn me and persecuted me;</p>
<p class="poetry">he has gnashed at me with his teeth;</p>
<p class="poetry">my adversary locks his eyes on me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:10</span> People have opened their mouths against me,</p>
<p class="poetry">they have struck my cheek in scorn; </p>
<p class="poetry">they unite together against me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:11</span> God abandons me to evil men, </p>
<p class="poetry">and throws me into the hands of wicked men.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:12</span> I was in peace, and he has shattered me. </p>
<p class="poetry">He has seized me by the neck and crushed me. </p>
<p class="poetry">He has made me his target; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:13</span> his archers surround me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Without pity he pierces my kidneys</p>
<p class="poetry">and pours out my gall on the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:14</span> He breaks through against me, time and time again; </p>
<p class="poetry">he rushes against me like a warrior. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:15</span> I have sewed sackcloth on my skin, </p>
<p class="poetry">and buried my horn in the dust; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:16</span> my face is reddened because of weeping, </p>
<p class="poetry">and on my eyelids there is a deep darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:17</span> although there is no violence in my hands</p>
<p class="poetry">and my prayer is pure. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Appeal to God as Witness</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:18</span> “O earth, do not cover my blood, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor let there be a secret place for my cry. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:19</span> Even now my witness is in heaven;</p>
<p class="poetry">my advocate is on high. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:20</span> My intercessor is my friend </p>
<p class="poetry">as my eyes pour out tears to God; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:21</span> and he contends with God on behalf of man</p>
<p class="poetry">as a man pleads for his friend. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:22</span> For the years that lie ahead are few, </p>
<p class="poetry">and then I will go on the way of no return. </p>

</body>
</html>