<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 48</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 48</h2><p class="psasuper">A song, a psalm by the Korahites.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is great and certainly worthy of praise</p>
<p class="poetry">in the city of our God, his holy hill. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:2</span> It is lofty and pleasing to look at, </p>
<p class="poetry">a source of joy to the whole earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">Mount Zion resembles the peaks of Zaphon; </p>
<p class="poetry">it is the city of the great king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:3</span> God is in its fortresses;</p>
<p class="poetry">he reveals himself as its defender. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:4</span> For look, the kings assemble; </p>
<p class="poetry">they advance together. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:5</span> As soon as they see, they are shocked; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are terrified, they quickly retreat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:6</span> Look at them shake uncontrollably, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a woman writhing in childbirth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:7</span> With an east wind</p>
<p class="poetry">you shatter the large ships. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:8</span> We heard about God’s mighty deeds; now we have seen them, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the city of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the city of our God.</p>
<p class="poetry">God makes it permanently secure. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:9</span> Within your temple</p>
<p class="poetry">we reflect on your loyal love, O God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:10</span> The praise you receive as far away as the ends of the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">is worthy of your reputation, O God. </p>
<p class="poetry">You execute justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:11</span> Mount Zion rejoices;</p>
<p class="poetry">the towns of Judah are happy, </p>
<p class="poetry">because of your acts of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:12</span> Walk around Zion. Encircle it.</p>
<p class="poetry">Count its towers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:13</span> Consider its defenses. </p>
<p class="poetry">Walk through its fortresses,</p>
<p class="poetry">so you can tell the next generation about it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">48:14</span> For God, our God, is our defender forever. </p>
<p class="poetry">He guides us. </p>

</body>
</html>