<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge the Earth</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:1</span> Look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is ready to devastate the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">and leave it in ruins;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will mar its surface</p>
<p class="poetry">and scatter its inhabitants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:2</span> Everyone will suffer—the priest as well as the people, </p>
<p class="poetry">the master as well as the servant, </p>
<p class="poetry">the elegant lady as well as the female attendant, </p>
<p class="poetry">the seller as well as the buyer, </p>
<p class="poetry">the borrower as well as the lender, </p>
<p class="poetry">the creditor as well as the debtor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:3</span> The earth will be completely devastated</p>
<p class="poetry">and thoroughly ransacked.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has decreed this judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:4</span> The earth dries up and withers,</p>
<p class="poetry">the world shrivels up and withers;</p>
<p class="poetry">the prominent people of the earth fade away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:5</span> The earth is defiled by its inhabitants, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they have violated laws,</p>
<p class="poetry">disregarded the regulation, </p>
<p class="poetry">and broken the permanent treaty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:6</span> So a treaty curse devours the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">its inhabitants pay for their guilt. </p>
<p class="poetry">This is why the inhabitants of the earth disappear, </p>
<p class="poetry">and are reduced to just a handful of people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:7</span> The new wine dries up,</p>
<p class="poetry">the vines shrivel up,</p>
<p class="poetry">all those who like to celebrate groan. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:8</span> The happy sound of the tambourines stops,</p>
<p class="poetry">the revelry of those who celebrate comes to a halt,</p>
<p class="poetry">the happy sound of the harp ceases. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:9</span> They no longer sing and drink wine; </p>
<p class="poetry">the beer tastes bitter to those who drink it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:10</span> The ruined town is shattered;</p>
<p class="poetry">all the houses are shut up tight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:11</span> They howl in the streets because of what happened to the wine; </p>
<p class="poetry">all joy turns to sorrow; </p>
<p class="poetry">celebrations disappear from the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:12</span> The city is left in ruins; </p>
<p class="poetry">the gate is reduced to rubble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:13</span> This is what will happen throughout the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">among the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">It will be like when they beat an olive tree,</p>
<p class="poetry">and just a few olives are left at the end of the harvest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:14</span> They lift their voices and shout joyfully;</p>
<p class="poetry">they praise the majesty of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in the west. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:15</span> So in the east extol the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">along the seacoasts extol the fame of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:16</span> From the ends of the earth we hear songs—</p>
<p class="poetry">the Just One is majestic. </p>
<p class="poetry">But I say, “I’m wasting away! I’m wasting away! I’m doomed!</p>
<p class="poetry">Deceivers deceive, deceivers thoroughly deceive!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:17</span> Terror, pit, and snare</p>
<p class="poetry">are ready to overtake, you inhabitants of the earth! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:18</span> The one who runs away from the sound of the terror</p>
<p class="poetry">will fall into the pit; </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who climbs out of the pit</p>
<p class="poetry">will be trapped by the snare.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the floodgates of the heavens are opened up </p>
<p class="poetry">and the foundations of the earth shake. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:19</span> The earth is broken in pieces,</p>
<p class="poetry">the earth is ripped to shreds,</p>
<p class="poetry">the earth shakes violently. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:20</span> The earth will stagger around like a drunk;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will sway back and forth like a hut in a windstorm. </p>
<p class="poetry">Its sin will weigh it down,</p>
<p class="poetry">and it will fall and never get up again. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Become King</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:21</span> At that time the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will punish </p>
<p class="poetry">the heavenly forces in the heavens </p>
<p class="poetry">and the earthly kings on the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:22</span> They will be imprisoned in a pit, </p>
<p class="poetry">locked up in a prison,</p>
<p class="poetry">and after staying there for a long time, they will be punished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">24:23</span> The full moon will be covered up, </p>
<p class="poetry">the bright sun will be darkened; </p>
<p class="poetry">for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies will rule </p>
<p class="poetry">on Mount Zion in Jerusalem </p>
<p class="poetry">in the presence of his assembly, in majestic splendor. </p>

</body>
</html>