<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Matthew 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> When Jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in their towns. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus and John the Baptist</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:2</span> Now when John heard in prison about the deeds Christ had done, he sent his disciples to ask a question: <span class="verse">11:3</span> “Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?” <span class="verse">11:4</span> Jesus answered them, “Go tell John what you hear and see: <span class="verse">11:5</span> The blind see, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have good news proclaimed to them <span class="verse">11:6</span> —and blessed is anyone who takes no offense at me!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:7</span> While they were going away, Jesus began to speak to the crowd about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? <span class="verse">11:8</span> What did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Look, those who wear soft clothing are in the palaces of kings! <span class="verse">11:9</span> What did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet! <span class="verse">11:10</span> This is the one about whom it is written: </p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<b><i>Look, I am sending my messenger ahead of you,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>who will prepare your way before you</b></i>.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:11</span> “I tell you the truth, among those born of women, no one has arisen greater than John the Baptist. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he is! <span class="verse">11:12</span> From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and forceful people lay hold of it. <span class="verse">11:13</span> For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John appeared. <span class="verse">11:14</span> And if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah, who is to come. <span class="verse">11:15</span> The one who has ears had better listen! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:16</span> “To what should I compare this generation? They are like children sitting in the marketplaces who call out to one another, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:17</span> ‘We played the flute for you, yet you did not dance; </p>
<p class="poetry">we wailed in mourning, yet you did not weep.’ </p>
<p class="bodyblock"><span class="verse">11:18</span> For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon!’ <span class="verse">11:19</span> The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look at him, a glutton and a drunk, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ But wisdom is vindicated by her deeds.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Woes on Unrepentant Cities </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:20</span> Then Jesus began to criticize openly the cities in which he had done many of his miracles, because they did not repent. <span class="verse">11:21</span> “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! If the miracles done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. <span class="verse">11:22</span> But I tell you, it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you! <span class="verse">11:23</span> And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? No, you will be thrown down to Hades! For if the miracles done among you had been done in Sodom, it would have continued to this day. <span class="verse">11:24</span> But I tell you, it will be more bearable for the region of Sodom on the day of judgment than for you!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Invitation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:25</span> At that time Jesus said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent, and have revealed them to little children. <span class="verse">11:26</span> Yes, Father, for this was your gracious will. <span class="verse">11:27</span> All things have been handed over to me by my Father. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son decides to reveal him. <span class="verse">11:28</span> Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest. <span class="verse">11:29</span> Take my yoke on you and learn from me, because I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. <span class="verse">11:30</span> For my yoke is easy to bear, and my load is not hard to carry.” </p>

</body>
</html>