<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 29</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 29</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ariel is Besieged </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:1</span> Ariel is as good as dead —</p>
<p class="poetry">Ariel, the town David besieged! </p>
<p class="poetry">Keep observing your annual rituals;</p>
<p class="poetry">celebrate your festivals on schedule. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:2</span> I will threaten Ariel,</p>
<p class="poetry">and she will mourn intensely</p>
<p class="poetry">and become like an altar hearth before me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:3</span> I will lay siege to you on all sides; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will besiege you with troops; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will raise siege works against you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:4</span> You will fall; </p>
<p class="poetry">while lying on the ground you will speak;</p>
<p class="poetry">from the dust where you lie, your words will be heard. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your voice will sound like a spirit speaking from the underworld; </p>
<p class="poetry">from the dust you will chirp as if muttering an incantation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:5</span> But the horde of invaders will be like fine dust,</p>
<p class="poetry">the horde of tyrants like chaff that is blown away.</p>
<p class="poetry">It will happen suddenly, in a flash. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:6</span> Judgment will come from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, </p>
<p class="poetry">accompanied by thunder, earthquake, and a loud noise,</p>
<p class="poetry">by a strong gale, a windstorm, and a consuming flame of fire. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:7</span> It will be like a dream, a night vision.</p>
<p class="poetry">There will be a horde from all the nations that fight against Ariel,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who attack her and her stronghold and besiege her.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:8</span> It will be like a hungry man dreaming that he is eating,</p>
<p class="poetry">only to awaken and find that his stomach is empty. </p>
<p class="poetry">It will be like a thirsty man dreaming that he is drinking,</p>
<p class="poetry">only to awaken and find that he is still weak and his thirst unquenched. </p>
<p class="poetry">So it will be for the horde from all the nations</p>
<p class="poetry">that fight against Mount Zion. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s People Are Spiritually Insensitive</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:9</span> You will be shocked and amazed! </p>
<p class="poetry">You are totally blind! </p>
<p class="poetry">They are drunk, but not because of wine;</p>
<p class="poetry">they stagger, but not because of beer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:10</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has poured out on you</p>
<p class="poetry">a strong urge to sleep deeply. </p>
<p class="poetry">He has shut your eyes (you prophets),</p>
<p class="poetry">and covered your heads (you seers). </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:11</span> To you this entire prophetic revelation is like words in a sealed scroll. When they hand it to one who can read and say, “Read this,” he responds, “I can’t, because it is sealed.” <span class="verse">29:12</span> Or when they hand the scroll to one who can’t read and say, “Read this,” he says, “I can’t read.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:13</span> The Lord says,</p>
<p class="poetry">“These people say they are loyal to me; </p>
<p class="poetry">they say wonderful things about me, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they are not really loyal to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their worship consists of </p>
<p class="poetry">nothing but man-made ritual. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:14</span> Therefore I will again do an amazing thing for these people—</p>
<p class="poetry">an absolutely extraordinary deed. </p>
<p class="poetry">Wise men will have nothing to say,</p>
<p class="poetry">the sages will have no explanations.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:15</span> Those who try to hide their plans from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> are as good as dead, </p>
<p class="poetry">who do their work in secret and boast, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Who sees us? Who knows what we’re doing?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:16</span> Your thinking is perverse! </p>
<p class="poetry">Should the potter be regarded as clay? </p>
<p class="poetry">Should the thing made say about its maker, “He didn’t make me”?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or should the pottery say about the potter, “He doesn’t understand”? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Changes Are Coming </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:17</span> In just a very short time </p>
<p class="poetry">Lebanon will turn into an orchard,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the orchard will be considered a forest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:18</span> At that time the deaf will be able to hear words read from a scroll,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the eyes of the blind will be able to see through deep darkness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:19</span> The downtrodden will again rejoice in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">the poor among humankind will take delight in the Holy One of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:20</span> For tyrants will disappear,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who taunt will vanish,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all those who love to do wrong will be eliminated —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:21</span> those who bear false testimony against a person, </p>
<p class="poetry">who entrap the one who arbitrates at the city gate </p>
<p class="poetry">and deprive the innocent of justice by making false charges. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:22</span> So this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the one who delivered Abraham, has said to the family of Jacob: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Jacob will no longer be ashamed;</p>
<p class="poetry">their faces will no longer show their embarrassment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:23</span> For when they see their children,</p>
<p class="poetry">whom I will produce among them, </p>
<p class="poetry">they will honor my name.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will honor the Holy One of Jacob; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will respect the God of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:24</span> Those who stray morally will gain understanding; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who complain will acquire insight. </p>

</body>
</html>