<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Kings 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Kings<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ahab Dies in Battle</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:1</span> There was no war between Syria and Israel for three years. <span class="verse">22:2</span> In the third year King Jehoshaphat of Judah came down to visit the king of Israel. <span class="verse">22:3</span> The king of Israel said to his servants, “Surely you recognize that Ramoth Gilead belongs to us, though we are hesitant to reclaim it from the king of Syria.” <span class="verse">22:4</span> Then he said to Jehoshaphat, “Will you go with me to attack Ramoth Gilead?” Jehoshaphat replied to the king of Israel, “I will support you; my army and horses are at your disposal.” <span class="verse">22:5</span> But then Jehoshaphat said to Israel’s king, “Please seek a message from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> this very day.” <span class="verse">22:6</span> So the king of Israel assembled about 400 prophets and asked them, “Should I attack Ramoth Gilead or not?” They said, “Attack! The Sovereign One will hand it over to the king.” <span class="verse">22:7</span> But Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there not a prophet of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> still here, that we may ask him?” <span class="verse">22:8</span> The king of Israel answered Jehoshaphat, “There is still one man through whom we can seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s will. But I despise him because he does not prophesy prosperity for me, but disaster. His name is Micaiah son of Imlah.” Jehoshaphat said, “The king should not say such things.” <span class="verse">22:9</span> The king of Israel summoned an official and said, “Quickly bring Micaiah son of Imlah.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:10</span> Now the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah were sitting on their respective thrones, dressed in their robes, at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria. All the prophets were prophesying before them. <span class="verse">22:11</span> Zedekiah son of Kenaanah made iron horns and said, “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said, ‘With these you will gore Syria until they are destroyed.’” <span class="verse">22:12</span> All the prophets were prophesying the same, saying, “Attack Ramoth Gilead! You will succeed; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will hand it over to the king.” <span class="verse">22:13</span> Now the messenger who went to summon Micaiah said to him, “Look, the prophets are in complete agreement that the king will succeed. Your words must agree with theirs; you must predict success.” <span class="verse">22:14</span> But Micaiah said, “As certainly as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lives, I will say what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> tells me to say.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:15</span> When he came before the king, the king asked him, “Micaiah, should we attack Ramoth Gilead or not?” He answered him, “Attack! You will succeed; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will hand it over to the king.” <span class="verse">22:16</span> The king said to him, “How many times must I make you solemnly promise in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> to tell me only the truth?” <span class="verse">22:17</span> Micaiah said, “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains like sheep that have no shepherd. Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, ‘They have no master. They should go home in peace.’” <span class="verse">22:18</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Didn’t I tell you he does not prophesy prosperity for me, but disaster?” <span class="verse">22:19</span> Micaiah said, “That being the case, listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message. I saw the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> sitting on his throne, with all the heavenly assembly standing beside him on his right and on his left. <span class="verse">22:20</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, ‘Who will deceive Ahab, so he will attack Ramoth Gilead and die there?’ One said this and another that. <span class="verse">22:21</span> Then a spirit stepped forward and stood before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. He said, ‘I will deceive him.’ <span class="verse">22:22</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> asked him, ‘How?’ He replied, ‘I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets.’ The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, ‘Deceive and overpower him. Go out and do as you have proposed.’ <span class="verse">22:23</span> So now, look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has placed a lying spirit in the mouths of all these prophets of yours, but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has decreed disaster for you.” <span class="verse">22:24</span> Zedekiah son of Kenaanah approached, hit Micaiah on the jaw, and said, “Which way did the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s Spirit go when he went from me to speak to you?” <span class="verse">22:25</span> Micaiah replied, “Look, you will see in the day when you go into an inner room to hide.” <span class="verse">22:26</span> Then the king of Israel said, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon the city official and Joash the king’s son. <span class="verse">22:27</span> Say, ‘This is what the king says, “Put this man in prison. Give him only a little bread and water until I safely return.”’” <span class="verse">22:28</span> Micaiah said, “If you really do safely return, then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has not spoken through me.” Then he added, “Take note, all you people.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:29</span> The king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah attacked Ramoth Gilead. <span class="verse">22:30</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and then enter into the battle, but you wear your royal robes.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and then entered into the battle. <span class="verse">22:31</span> Now the king of Syria had ordered his thirty-two chariot commanders, “Do not fight common soldiers or high-ranking officers; fight only the king of Israel.” <span class="verse">22:32</span> When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “He must be the king of Israel.” So they turned and attacked him, but Jehoshaphat cried out. <span class="verse">22:33</span> When the chariot commanders realized he was not the king of Israel, they turned away from him. <span class="verse">22:34</span> Now an archer shot an arrow at random, and it struck the king of Israel between the plates of his armor. The king ordered his charioteer, “Turn around and take me from the battle line, because I’m wounded.” <span class="verse">22:35</span> While the battle raged throughout the day, the king stood propped up in his chariot opposite the Syrians. He died in the evening; the blood from the wound ran down into the bottom of the chariot. <span class="verse">22:36</span> As the sun was setting, a cry went through the camp, “Each one should return to his city and to his homeland.” <span class="verse">22:37</span> So the king died and was taken to Samaria, where they buried him. <span class="verse">22:38</span> They washed off the chariot at the pool of Samaria. Then the dogs licked his blood, while the prostitutes bathed, in keeping with the <span class="smcaps">Lord’s</span> message that he had spoken. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:39</span> The rest of the events of Ahab’s reign, including a record of his accomplishments and how he built a luxurious palace and various cities, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel. <span class="verse">22:40</span> Ahab passed away. His son Ahaziah replaced him as king. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jehoshaphat’s Reign over Judah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:41</span> In the fourth year of Ahab’s reign over Israel, Asa’s son Jehoshaphat became king over Judah. <span class="verse">22:42</span> Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he became king and he reigned for twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi. <span class="verse">22:43</span> He followed in his father Asa’s footsteps and was careful to do what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> approved. (22:44) However, the high places were not eliminated; the people continued to offer sacrifices and burn incense on the high places. <span class="verse">22:44</span> (22:45) Jehoshaphat was also at peace with the king of Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:45</span> The rest of the events of Jehoshaphat’s reign, including his successes and military exploits, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah. <span class="verse">22:46</span> He removed from the land any male cultic prostitutes who had managed to survive the reign of his father Asa. <span class="verse">22:47</span> There was no king in Edom at this time; a governor ruled. <span class="verse">22:48</span> Jehoshaphat built a fleet of large merchant ships to travel to Ophir for gold, but they never made the voyage because they were shipwrecked in Ezion Geber. <span class="verse">22:49</span> Then Ahaziah son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, “Let my sailors join yours in the fleet,” but Jehoshaphat refused. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:50</span> Jehoshaphat passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the city of his ancestor David. His son Jehoram replaced him as king. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ahaziah’s Reign over Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:51</span> In the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat’s reign over Judah, Ahab’s son Ahaziah became king over Israel in Samaria. He ruled for two years over Israel. <span class="verse">22:52</span> He did evil in the sight of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and followed in the footsteps of his father and mother; like Jeroboam son of Nebat, he encouraged Israel to sin. <span class="verse">22:53</span> He worshiped and bowed down to Baal, angering the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel just as his father had done. </p>

</body>
</html>