<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Symbolic Visions of Judgment</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> showed me this: I saw him making locusts just as the crops planted late were beginning to sprout. (The crops planted late sprout after the royal harvest.) <span class="verse">7:2</span> When they had completely consumed the earth’s vegetation, I said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, forgive Israel! </p>
<p class="poetry">How can Jacob survive? </p>
<p class="poetry">He is too weak!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> decided not to do this. “It will not happen,” the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:4</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> showed me this: I saw the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> summoning a shower of fire. It consumed the great deep and devoured the fields. <span class="verse">7:5</span> I said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, stop! </p>
<p class="poetry">How can Jacob survive? </p>
<p class="poetry">He is too weak!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> decided not to do this. The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “This will not happen either.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:7</span> He showed me this: I saw the Lord standing by a tin wall holding tin in his hand. <span class="verse">7:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to me, “What do you see, Amos?” I said, “Tin.” The Lord then said,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Look, I am about to place tin among my people Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will no longer overlook their sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> Isaac’s centers of worship will become desolate;</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel’s holy places will be in ruins.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will attack Jeroboam’s dynasty with the sword.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Amos Confronts a Priest</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:10</span> Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent this message to King Jeroboam of Israel: “Amos is conspiring against you in the very heart of the kingdom of Israel! The land cannot endure all his prophecies. <span class="verse">7:11</span> As a matter of fact, Amos is saying this: ‘Jeroboam will die by the sword and Israel will certainly be carried into exile away from its land.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:12</span> Amaziah then said to Amos, “Leave, you visionary! Run away to the land of Judah. Earn your living and prophesy there! <span class="verse">7:13</span> Don’t prophesy at Bethel any longer, for a royal temple and palace are here.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:14</span> Amos replied to Amaziah, “I was not a prophet by profession. No, I was a herdsman who also took care of sycamore fig trees. <span class="verse">7:15</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> took me from tending flocks and gave me this commission, ‘Go! Prophesy to my people Israel.’ <span class="verse">7:16</span> So now listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message! You say, ‘Don’t prophesy against Israel! Don’t preach against the family of Isaac!’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:17</span> “Therefore this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Your wife will become a prostitute in the streets </p>
<p class="poetry">and your sons and daughters will die violently. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your land will be given to others </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will die in a foreign land.</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel will certainly be carried into exile away from its land.’” </p>

</body>
</html>