<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Lamentations 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Lamentations<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Prophet Speaks</p><p class="lamhebrew"><b><span class="hebrew">א</span></b> (<i>Alef</i>) </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:1</span>  Alas! The city once full of people </p>
<p class="poetry">now sits all alone! </p>
<p class="poetry">The prominent lady among the nations</p>
<p class="poetry">has become a widow! </p>
<p class="poetry">The princess who once ruled the provinces </p>
<p class="poetry">has become a forced laborer! </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ב</span> (<i>Bet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> She weeps bitterly at night;</p>
<p class="poetry">tears stream down her cheeks. </p>
<p class="poetry">She has no one to comfort her</p>
<p class="poetry">among all her lovers. </p>
<p class="poetry">All her friends have betrayed her;</p>
<p class="poetry">they have become her enemies. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ג</span> (<i>Gimel</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> Judah has departed into exile </p>
<p class="poetry">under affliction and harsh oppression. </p>
<p class="poetry">She lives among the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">she has found no resting place.</p>
<p class="poetry">All who pursued her overtook her</p>
<p class="poetry">in narrow straits. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ד</span> (<i>Dalet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> The roads to Zion mourn </p>
<p class="poetry">because no one travels to the festivals. </p>
<p class="poetry">All her city gates are deserted; </p>
<p class="poetry">her priests groan. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her virgins grieve; </p>
<p class="poetry">she is in bitter anguish! </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ה</span> (<i>He</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> Her foes subjugated her; </p>
<p class="poetry">her enemies are at ease. </p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> afflicted her</p>
<p class="poetry">because of her many acts of rebellion. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her children went away</p>
<p class="poetry">captive before the enemy. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ו</span> (<i>Vav</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> All of Daughter Zion’s splendor </p>
<p class="poetry">has departed. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her leaders became like deer;</p>
<p class="poetry">they found no pasture,</p>
<p class="poetry">so they were too exhausted to escape </p>
<p class="poetry">from the hunter. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ז</span> (<i>Zayin</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> Jerusalem remembers, </p>
<p class="poetry">when she became a poor homeless person, </p>
<p class="poetry">all her treasures</p>
<p class="poetry">that she owned in days of old. </p>
<p class="poetry">When her people fell into an enemy’s grip, </p>
<p class="poetry">none of her allies came to her rescue. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her enemies gloated over her;</p>
<p class="poetry">they sneered at her downfall. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ח</span> (<i>Khet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> Jerusalem committed terrible sin; </p>
<p class="poetry">therefore she became an object of scorn. </p>
<p class="poetry">All who admired her have despised her </p>
<p class="poetry">because they have seen her nakedness. </p>
<p class="poetry">She groans aloud </p>
<p class="poetry">and turns away in shame. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ט</span> (<i>Tet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> Her menstrual flow has soiled her clothing; </p>
<p class="poetry">she did not consider the consequences of her sin. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her demise was astonishing, </p>
<p class="poetry">and there was no one to comfort her.</p>
<p class="poetry">She cried, “Look, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, on my affliction </p>
<p class="poetry">because my enemy boasts!” </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">י</span> (<i>Yod</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> An enemy grabbed </p>
<p class="poetry">all her valuables. </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed she watched in horror as Gentiles </p>
<p class="poetry">invaded her holy temple —</p>
<p class="poetry">those whom you had commanded: </p>
<p class="poetry">“They must not enter your assembly place.” </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">כ</span> (<i>Kaf</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> All her people groaned</p>
<p class="poetry">as they searched for a morsel of bread. </p>
<p class="poetry">They exchanged their valuables </p>
<p class="poetry">for just enough food </p>
<p class="poetry">to stay alive. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jerusalem Speaks</p><p class="poetry">“Look, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! Consider </p>
<p class="poetry">that I have become worthless!” </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ל</span> (<i>Lamed</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> Is it nothing to you, all you who pass by on the road? </p>
<p class="poetry">Look and see!</p>
<p class="poetry">Is there any pain like mine?</p>
<p class="poetry">The Lord has afflicted me, </p>
<p class="poetry">he has inflicted it on me </p>
<p class="poetry">when he burned with anger. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">מ</span> (<i>Mem</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> He sent down fire </p>
<p class="poetry">into my bones, and it overcame them. </p>
<p class="poetry">He spread out a trapper’s net for my feet; </p>
<p class="poetry">he made me turn back.</p>
<p class="poetry">He has made me desolate;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am faint all day long. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">נ</span> (<i>Nun</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> My sins are bound around my neck like a yoke; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are fastened together by his hand.</p>
<p class="poetry">He has placed his yoke on my neck; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has sapped my strength. </p>
<p class="poetry">The Lord has handed me over </p>
<p class="poetry">to those whom I cannot resist. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ס</span> (<i>Samek</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> He rounded up all my mighty ones; </p>
<p class="poetry">The Lord did this in my midst.</p>
<p class="poetry">He summoned an assembly against me </p>
<p class="poetry">to shatter my young men.</p>
<p class="poetry">The Lord has stomped like grapes </p>
<p class="poetry">the virgin daughter, Judah. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ע</span> (<i>Ayin</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> I weep because of these things; </p>
<p class="poetry">my eyes flow with tears. </p>
<p class="poetry">For there is no one in sight who can comfort me </p>
<p class="poetry">or encourage me. </p>
<p class="poetry">My children are desolated </p>
<p class="poetry">because an enemy has prevailed. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">פ</span> (<i>Pe</i>)</p><p class="paragraphtitle">The Prophet Speaks</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> Zion spread out her hands,</p>
<p class="poetry">but there is no one to comfort her.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has issued a decree against Jacob; </p>
<p class="poetry">his neighbors have become his enemies.</p>
<p class="poetry">Jerusalem has become</p>
<p class="poetry">like filthy garbage in their midst. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">צ</span> (<i>Tsade</i>)</p><p class="paragraphtitle">Jerusalem Speaks</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is right to judge me! </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, I rebelled against his commands. </p>
<p class="poetry">Please listen, all you nations, </p>
<p class="poetry">and look at my suffering!</p>
<p class="poetry">My young women and men</p>
<p class="poetry">have gone into exile.</p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ק</span> (<i>Qof</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:19</span> I called for my lovers, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they had deceived me.</p>
<p class="poetry">My priests and my elders </p>
<p class="poetry">perished in the city.</p>
<p class="poetry">Truly they had searched for food </p>
<p class="poetry">to keep themselves alive. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ר</span> (<i>Resh</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:20</span> Look, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! I am distressed; </p>
<p class="poetry">my stomach is in knots! </p>
<p class="poetry">My heart is pounding inside me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, I was terribly rebellious! </p>
<p class="poetry">Out in the street the sword bereaves a mother of her children; </p>
<p class="poetry">Inside the house death is present. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ש</span> (<i>Sin/Shin</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:21</span> They have heard that I groan,</p>
<p class="poetry">yet there is no one to comfort me.</p>
<p class="poetry">All my enemies have heard of my trouble;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are glad that you have brought it about. </p>
<p class="poetry">Bring about the day of judgment that you promised </p>
<p class="poetry">so that they may end up like me! </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ת</span> (<i>Tav</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:22</span> Let all their wickedness come before you;</p>
<p class="poetry">afflict them</p>
<p class="poetry">just as you have afflicted me </p>
<p class="poetry">because of all my acts of rebellion. </p>
<p class="poetry">For my groans are many,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my heart is sick with sorrow. </p>

</body>
</html>