<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 69</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 69</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the tune of “Lilies”; by David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:1</span> Deliver me, O God,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the water has reached my neck. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:2</span> I sink into the deep mire</p>
<p class="poetry">where there is no solid ground; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am in deep water,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the current overpowers me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:3</span> I am exhausted from shouting for help.</p>
<p class="poetry">My throat is sore; </p>
<p class="poetry">my eyes grow tired from looking for my God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:4</span> Those who hate me without cause </p>
<p class="poetry">are more numerous than the hairs of my head.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who want to destroy me, </p>
<p class="poetry">my enemies for no reason, </p>
<p class="poetry">outnumber me. </p>
<p class="poetry">They make me repay what I did not steal. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:5</span> O God, you are aware of my foolish sins; </p>
<p class="poetry">my guilt is not hidden from you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:6</span> Let none who rely on you be disgraced because of me,</p>
<p class="poetry">O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let none who seek you be ashamed because of me,</p>
<p class="poetry">O God of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:7</span> For I suffer humiliation for your sake </p>
<p class="poetry">and am thoroughly disgraced. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:8</span> My own brothers treat me like a stranger;</p>
<p class="poetry">they act as if I were a foreigner. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:9</span> Certainly zeal for your house consumes me;</p>
<p class="poetry">I endure the insults of those who insult you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:10</span> I weep and refrain from eating food, </p>
<p class="poetry">which causes others to insult me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:11</span> I wear sackcloth</p>
<p class="poetry">and they ridicule me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:12</span> Those who sit at the city gate gossip about me;</p>
<p class="poetry">drunkards mock me in their songs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:13</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, may you hear my prayer and be favorably disposed to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">O God, because of your great loyal love, </p>
<p class="poetry">answer me with your faithful deliverance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:14</span> Rescue me from the mud. Don’t let me sink.</p>
<p class="poetry">Deliver me from those who hate me,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the deep water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:15</span> Don’t let the current overpower me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t let the deep swallow me up.</p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t let the Pit devour me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:16</span> Answer me, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for your loyal love is good. </p>
<p class="poetry">Because of your great compassion, turn toward me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:17</span> Do not ignore your servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I am in trouble. Answer me right away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:18</span> Come near me and redeem me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Because of my enemies, rescue me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:19</span> You know how I am insulted, humiliated, and disgraced;</p>
<p class="poetry">you can see all my enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:20</span> Their insults are painful and make me lose heart; </p>
<p class="poetry">I look for sympathy, but receive none, </p>
<p class="poetry">for comforters, but find none. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:21</span> They put bitter poison into my food,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to quench my thirst they give me vinegar to drink. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:22</span> May their dining table become a trap before them.</p>
<p class="poetry">May it be a snare for that group of friends. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:23</span> May their eyes be blinded. </p>
<p class="poetry">Make them shake violently. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:24</span> Pour out your judgment on them.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your raging anger overtake them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:25</span> May their camp become desolate,</p>
<p class="poetry">their tents uninhabited. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:26</span> For they harass the one whom you discipline; </p>
<p class="poetry">they spread the news about the suffering of those whom you punish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:27</span> Hold them accountable for all their sins. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not vindicate them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:28</span> May their names be deleted from the scroll of the living. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not let their names be listed with the godly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:29</span> I am oppressed and suffering.</p>
<p class="poetry">O God, deliver and protect me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:30</span> I will sing praises to God’s name. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will magnify him as I give him thanks. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:31</span> That will please the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> more than an ox or a bull</p>
<p class="poetry">with horns and hooves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:32</span> The oppressed look on—let them rejoice.</p>
<p class="poetry">You who seek God, may you be encouraged. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:33</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> listens to the needy;</p>
<p class="poetry">he does not despise his captive people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:34</span> Let the heavens and the earth praise him,</p>
<p class="poetry">along with the seas and everything that swims in them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:35</span> For God will deliver Zion</p>
<p class="poetry">and rebuild the cities of Judah,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his people will again live in them and possess Zion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">69:36</span> The descendants of his servants will inherit it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those who are loyal to him will live in it. </p>

</body>
</html>