<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 2</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Why do the nations rebel? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why are the countries devising plots that will fail? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> The kings of the earth form a united front; </p>
<p class="poetry">the rulers collaborate </p>
<p class="poetry">against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and his anointed king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> They say, “Let’s tear off the shackles they’ve put on us. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let’s free ourselves from their ropes.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> The one enthroned in heaven laughs in disgust; </p>
<p class="poetry">the Lord taunts them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> Then he angrily speaks to them</p>
<p class="poetry">and terrifies them in his rage, saying, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> “I myself have installed my king</p>
<p class="poetry">on Zion, my holy hill.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> The king says, “I will announce the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s decree. He said to me: </p>
<p class="poetry">‘You are my son. This very day I have become your father. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Ask me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will give you the nations as your inheritance, </p>
<p class="poetry">the ends of the earth as your personal property. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> You will break them with an iron scepter; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will smash them like a potter’s jar.’” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> So now, you kings, do what is wise; </p>
<p class="poetry">you rulers of the earth, submit to correction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Serve the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in fear.</p>
<p class="poetry">Repent in terror. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> Give sincere homage. </p>
<p class="poetry">Otherwise he will be angry, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will die because of your behavior, </p>
<p class="poetry">when his anger quickly ignites. </p>
<p class="poetry">How blessed are all who take shelter in him! </p>

</body>
</html>