<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Matthew 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Cleansing a Leper</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> After he came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him. <span class="verse">8:2</span> And a leper approached and bowed low before him, saying, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.” <span class="verse">8:3</span> He stretched out his hand and touched him saying, “I am willing. Be clean!” Immediately his leprosy was cleansed. <span class="verse">8:4</span> Then Jesus said to him, “See that you do not speak to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest, and bring the offering that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing the Centurion’s Servant </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:5</span> When he entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him asking for help: <span class="verse">8:6</span> “Lord, my servant is lying at home paralyzed, in terrible anguish.” <span class="verse">8:7</span> Jesus said to him, “I will come and heal him.” <span class="verse">8:8</span> But the centurion replied, “Lord, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof! Instead, just say the word and my servant will be healed. <span class="verse">8:9</span> For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave ‘Do this!’ and he does it.” <span class="verse">8:10</span> When Jesus heard this he was amazed and said to those who followed him, “I tell you the truth, I have not found such faith in anyone in Israel! <span class="verse">8:11</span> I tell you, many will come from the east and west to share the banquet with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, <span class="verse">8:12</span> but the sons of the kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” <span class="verse">8:13</span> Then Jesus said to the centurion, “Go; just as you believed, it will be done for you.” And the servant was healed at that hour. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healings at Peter’s House </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Now when Jesus entered Peter’s house, he saw his mother-in-law lying down, sick with a fever. <span class="verse">8:15</span> He touched her hand, and the fever left her. Then she got up and began to serve them. <span class="verse">8:16</span> When it was evening, many demon-possessed people were brought to him. He drove out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick. <span class="verse">8:17</span> In this way what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah was fulfilled: </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>He took our weaknesses and carried our diseases</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Challenging Professed Followers </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:18</span> Now when Jesus saw a large crowd around him, he gave orders to go to the other side of the lake. <span class="verse">8:19</span> Then an expert in the law came to him and said, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.” <span class="verse">8:20</span> Jesus said to him, “Foxes have dens, and the birds in the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.” <span class="verse">8:21</span> Another of the disciples said to him, “Lord, let me first go and bury my father.” <span class="verse">8:22</span> But Jesus said to him, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Stilling of a Storm </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:23</span> As he got into the boat, his disciples followed him. <span class="verse">8:24</span> And a great storm developed on the sea so that the waves began to swamp the boat. But he was asleep. <span class="verse">8:25</span> So they came and woke him up saying, “Lord, save us! We are about to die!” <span class="verse">8:26</span> But he said to them, “Why are you cowardly, you people of little faith?” Then he got up and rebuked the winds and the sea, and it was dead calm. <span class="verse">8:27</span> And the men were amazed and said, “What sort of person is this? Even the winds and the sea obey him!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing the Gadarene Demoniacs </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:28</span> When he came to the other side, to the region of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men coming from the tombs met him. They were extremely violent, so that no one was able to pass by that way. <span class="verse">8:29</span> They cried out, “Son of God, leave us alone! Have you come here to torment us before the time?” <span class="verse">8:30</span> A large herd of pigs was feeding some distance from them. <span class="verse">8:31</span> Then the demons begged him, “If you drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs.” <span class="verse">8:32</span> And he said, “Go!” So they came out and went into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep slope into the lake and drowned in the water. <span class="verse">8:33</span> The herdsmen ran off, went into the town, and told everything that had happened to the demon-possessed men. <span class="verse">8:34</span> Then the entire town came out to meet Jesus. And when they saw him, they begged him to leave their region. </p>

</body>
</html>