<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:1</span> A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth,</p>
<p class="poetry">good favor more than silver or gold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:2</span> The rich and the poor are met together; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is the Creator of them both. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:3</span> A shrewd person saw danger and hid himself,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the naive passed on by and paid for it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:4</span> The reward for humility and fearing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> </p>
<p class="poetry">is riches and honor and life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:5</span> Thorns and snares are in the path of the perverse,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who guards himself keeps far from them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:6</span> Train a child in the way that he should go, </p>
<p class="poetry">and when he is old he will not turn from it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:7</span> The rich rule over the poor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the borrower is servant to the lender. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:8</span> The one who sows iniquity will reap trouble,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the rod of his fury will end. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:9</span> A generous person will be blessed, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he has given some of his food to the poor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:10</span> Drive out the scorner and contention will leave;</p>
<p class="poetry">strife and insults will cease. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:11</span> The one who loves a pure heart </p>
<p class="poetry">and whose speech is gracious —the king will be his friend. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:12</span> The eyes of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> watched over a cause, </p>
<p class="poetry">and subverted the words of the treacherous person. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:13</span> The sluggard has said, “There is a lion outside!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will be killed in the middle of the streets!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:14</span> The mouth of an adulteress is like a deep pit; </p>
<p class="poetry">the one against whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is angry will fall into it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:15</span> Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the rod of discipline will drive it far from him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:16</span> The one who oppresses the poor to increase his own gain</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who gives to the rich —both end up only in poverty. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Sayings of the Wise </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:17</span> Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise,</p>
<p class="poetry">and apply your mind to my instruction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:18</span> For it is pleasing if you keep these sayings within you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they are ready on your lips. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:19</span> So that your confidence may be in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">I hereby make them known to you today—even you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:20</span> Have I not written thirty sayings for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">sayings of counsel and knowledge, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:21</span> to show you true and reliable words, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that you may give accurate answers to those who sent you?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:22</span> Do not exploit a poor person because he is poor</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not crush the needy in court, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:23</span> for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will plead their case </p>
<p class="poetry">and will rob the life of those who are robbing them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:24</span> Do not make friends with an angry person, </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not associate with a wrathful person, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:25</span> lest you learn his ways</p>
<p class="poetry">and entangle yourself in a snare. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:26</span> Do not be one who strikes hands in pledge</p>
<p class="poetry">or who puts up security for debts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:27</span> If you do not have enough to pay,</p>
<p class="poetry">your bed will be taken right out from under you! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:28</span> Do not move an ancient boundary stone </p>
<p class="poetry">that was put in place by your ancestors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:29</span> You have seen a person skilled in his work—</p>
<p class="poetry">he will take his position before kings;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will not take his position before obscure people. </p>

</body>
</html>