<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 51</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 51</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David, written when Nathan the prophet confronted him after David’s affair with Bathsheba. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:1</span> Have mercy on me, O God, because of your loyal love.</p>
<p class="poetry">Because of your great compassion, wipe away my rebellious acts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:2</span> Wash away my wrongdoing. </p>
<p class="poetry">Cleanse me of my sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:3</span> For I am aware of my rebellious acts;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am forever conscious of my sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:4</span> Against you—you above all —I have sinned;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have done what is evil in your sight.</p>
<p class="poetry">So you are just when you confront me; </p>
<p class="poetry">you are right when you condemn me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:5</span> Look, I was guilty of sin from birth,</p>
<p class="poetry">a sinner the moment my mother conceived me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:6</span> Look, you desire integrity in the inner man; </p>
<p class="poetry">you want me to possess wisdom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:7</span> Cleanse me with hyssop and I will be pure; </p>
<p class="poetry">wash me and I will be whiter than snow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:8</span> Grant me the ultimate joy of being forgiven. </p>
<p class="poetry">May the bones you crushed rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:9</span> Hide your face from my sins.</p>
<p class="poetry">Wipe away all my guilt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:10</span> Create for me a pure heart, O God. </p>
<p class="poetry">Renew a resolute spirit within me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:11</span> Do not reject me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not take your holy Spirit away from me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:12</span> Let me again experience the joy of your deliverance.</p>
<p class="poetry">Sustain me by giving me the desire to obey. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:13</span> Then I will teach rebels your merciful ways, </p>
<p class="poetry">and sinners will turn to you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:14</span> Rescue me from the guilt of murder, O God, the God who delivers me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then my tongue will shout for joy because of your righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:15</span> O Lord, give me the words. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then my mouth will praise you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:16</span> Certainly you do not want a sacrifice, or else I would offer it; </p>
<p class="poetry">you do not desire a burnt sacrifice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:17</span> The sacrifice God desires is a humble spirit —</p>
<p class="poetry">O God, a humble and repentant heart you will not reject. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:18</span> Because you favor Zion, do what is good for her. </p>
<p class="poetry">Fortify the walls of Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">51:19</span> Then you will accept the proper sacrifices, burnt sacrifices and whole offerings;</p>
<p class="poetry">then bulls will be sacrificed on your altar. </p>

</body>
</html>