<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lighting the Lamps</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">8:2</span> “Speak to Aaron and tell him, ‘When you set up the lamps, the seven lamps are to give light in front of the lampstand.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:3</span> And Aaron did so; he set up the lamps to face toward the front of the lampstand, as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded Moses. <span class="verse">8:4</span> This is how the lampstand was made: It was beaten work in gold; from its shaft to its flowers it was beaten work. According to the pattern that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had shown Moses, so he made the lampstand. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Separation of the Levites</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:5</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">8:6</span> “Take the Levites from among the Israelites and purify them. <span class="verse">8:7</span> And do this to them to purify them: Sprinkle water of purification on them; then have them shave all their body and wash their clothes, and so purify themselves. <span class="verse">8:8</span> Then they are to take a young bull with its grain offering of fine flour mixed with olive oil; and you are to take a second young bull for a purification offering. <span class="verse">8:9</span> You are to bring the Levites before the tent of meeting and assemble the entire community of the Israelites. <span class="verse">8:10</span> Then you are to bring the Levites before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and the Israelites are to lay their hands on the Levites; <span class="verse">8:11</span> and Aaron is to offer the Levites before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> as a wave offering from the Israelites, that they may do the work of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">8:12</span> When the Levites lay their hands on the heads of the bulls, offer the one for a purification offering and the other for a whole burnt offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, to make atonement for the Levites. <span class="verse">8:13</span> You are to have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons, and then offer them as a wave offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">8:14</span> And so you are to separate the Levites from among the Israelites, and the Levites will be mine.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:15</span> “After this, the Levites will go in to do the work of the tent of meeting. So you must cleanse them and offer them like a wave offering. <span class="verse">8:16</span> For they are entirely given to me from among the Israelites. I have taken them for myself instead of all who open the womb, the firstborn sons of all the Israelites. <span class="verse">8:17</span> For all the firstborn males among the Israelites are mine, both humans and animals; when I destroyed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I set them apart for myself. <span class="verse">8:18</span> So I have taken the Levites instead of all the firstborn sons among the Israelites. <span class="verse">8:19</span> I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and his sons from among the Israelites, to do the work for the Israelites in the tent of meeting, and to make atonement for the Israelites, so there will be no plague among the Israelites when the Israelites come near the sanctuary.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:20</span> So Moses and Aaron and the entire community of the Israelites did this with the Levites. According to all that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded Moses concerning the Levites, this is what the Israelites did with them. <span class="verse">8:21</span> The Levites purified themselves and washed their clothing; then Aaron presented them like a wave offering before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and Aaron made atonement for them to purify them. <span class="verse">8:22</span> After this, the Levites went in to do their work in the tent of meeting before Aaron and before his sons. As the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they did. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Work of the Levites</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:23</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">8:24</span> “This is what pertains to the Levites: At the age of twenty-five years and upward one may begin to join the company in the work of the tent of meeting, <span class="verse">8:25</span> and at the age of fifty years they must retire from performing the work and may no longer work. <span class="verse">8:26</span> They may assist their colleagues in the tent of meeting to attend to needs, but they must do no work. This is the way you must establish the Levites regarding their duties.” </p>

</body>
</html>