<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 132</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 132</h2><p class="psasuper">A song of ascents. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for David’s sake remember</p>
<p class="poetry">all his strenuous effort, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:2</span> and how he made a vow to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and swore an oath to the Powerful One of Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:3</span> He said, “I will not enter my own home, </p>
<p class="poetry">or get into my bed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:4</span> I will not allow my eyes to sleep,</p>
<p class="poetry">or my eyelids to slumber, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:5</span> until I find a place for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">a fine dwelling place for the Powerful One of Jacob.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:6</span> Look, we heard about it in Ephrathah; </p>
<p class="poetry">we found it in the territory of Jaar. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:7</span> Let us go to his dwelling place.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let us worship before his footstool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:8</span> Ascend, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, to your resting place,</p>
<p class="poetry">you and the ark of your strength. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:9</span> May your priests be clothed with integrity. </p>
<p class="poetry">May your loyal followers shout for joy.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:10</span> For the sake of David, your servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">do not reject your chosen king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made a reliable promise to David; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will not go back on his word. </p>
<p class="poetry">He said, “I will place one of your descendants on your throne. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:12</span> If your sons keep my covenant</p>
<p class="poetry">and the rules I teach them,</p>
<p class="poetry">their sons will also sit on your throne forever.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:13</span> Certainly the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has chosen Zion;</p>
<p class="poetry">he decided to make it his home. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:14</span> He said, “This will be my resting place forever;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will live here, for I have chosen it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:15</span> I will abundantly supply what she needs; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will give her poor all the food they need. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:16</span> I will protect her priests, </p>
<p class="poetry">and her godly people will shout exuberantly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:17</span> There I will make David strong; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have determined that my chosen king’s dynasty will continue. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">132:18</span> I will humiliate his enemies, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his crown will shine.” </p>

</body>
</html>