<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Exodus 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Exodus<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, “Now you will see what I will do to Pharaoh, for compelled by my strong hand he will release them, and by my strong hand he will drive them out of his land.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:2</span> God spoke to Moses and said to him, “I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">6:3</span> I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob as God Almighty, but by my name ‘the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’ I was not known to them. <span class="verse">6:4</span> I also established my covenant with them to give them the land of Canaan, where they were living as resident foreigners. <span class="verse">6:5</span> I have also heard the groaning of the Israelites, whom the Egyptians are enslaving, and I have remembered my covenant. <span class="verse">6:6</span> Therefore, tell the Israelites, ‘I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. I will bring you out from your enslavement to the Egyptians, I will rescue you from the hard labor they impose, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments. <span class="verse">6:7</span> I will take you to myself for a people, and I will be your God. Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, who brought you out from your enslavement to the Egyptians. <span class="verse">6:8</span> I will bring you to the land I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob—and I will give it to you as a possession. I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:9</span>  Moses told this to the Israelites, but they did not listen to him because of their discouragement and hard labor. <span class="verse">6:10</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, <span class="verse">6:11</span> “Go, tell Pharaoh king of Egypt that he must release the Israelites from his land.” <span class="verse">6:12</span> But Moses replied to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “If the Israelites did not listen to me, then how will Pharaoh listen to me, since I speak with difficulty?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them a charge for the Israelites and Pharaoh king of Egypt to bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Ancestry of Moses and Aaron</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:14</span>  These were the heads of their fathers’ households: </p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Reuben, the firstborn son of Israel, were Hanoch and Pallu, Hezron and Carmi. These were the clans of Reuben. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:15</span> The sons of Simeon were Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jakin, Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Canaanite woman. These were the clans of Simeon. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:16</span> Now these were the names of the sons of Levi, according to their records: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. (The length of Levi’s life was 137 years.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:17</span> The sons of Gershon, by their families, were Libni and Shimei. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:18</span> The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. (The length of Kohath’s life was 133 years.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:19</span> The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi. These were the clans of Levi, according to their records. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:20</span> Amram married his father’s sister Jochebed, and she bore him Aaron and Moses. (The length of Amram’s life was 137 years.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:21</span> The sons of Izhar were Korah, Nepheg, and Zikri. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:22</span> The sons of Uzziel were Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:23</span> Aaron married Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon, and she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:24</span> The sons of Korah were Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph. These were the Korahite clans. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:25</span> Now Eleazar son of Aaron married one of the daughters of Putiel and she bore him Phinehas.</p>
<p class="bodytext">These were the heads of the fathers’ households of Levi according to their clans. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:26</span> It was the same Aaron and Moses to whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “Bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt by their regiments.” <span class="verse">6:27</span> They were the men who were speaking to Pharaoh king of Egypt, in order to bring the Israelites out of Egypt. It was the same Moses and Aaron. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Authentication of the Word</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:28</span>  When the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, <span class="verse">6:29</span> he said to him, “I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Tell Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I am telling you.” <span class="verse">6:30</span> But Moses said before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “Since I speak with difficulty, why should Pharaoh listen to me?” </p>

</body>
</html>