<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 31</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 31</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:1</span> In you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I have taken shelter.</p>
<p class="poetry">Never let me be humiliated.</p>
<p class="poetry">Vindicate me by rescuing me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:2</span> Listen to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Quickly deliver me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Be my protector and refuge, </p>
<p class="poetry">a stronghold where I can be safe. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:3</span> For you are my high ridge and my stronghold;</p>
<p class="poetry">for the sake of your own reputation you lead me and guide me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:4</span> You will free me from the net they hid for me,</p>
<p class="poetry">for you are my place of refuge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:5</span> Into your hand I entrust my life; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will rescue me, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the faithful God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:6</span> I hate those who serve worthless idols, </p>
<p class="poetry">but I trust in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:7</span> I will be happy and rejoice in your faithfulness,</p>
<p class="poetry">because you notice my pain</p>
<p class="poetry">and you are aware of how distressed I am. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:8</span> You do not deliver me over to the power of the enemy;</p>
<p class="poetry">you enable me to stand in a wide open place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:9</span> Have mercy on me, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for I am in distress!</p>
<p class="poetry">My eyes grow dim from suffering. </p>
<p class="poetry">I have lost my strength. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:10</span> For my life nears its end in pain;</p>
<p class="poetry">my years draw to a close as I groan. </p>
<p class="poetry">My strength fails me because of my sin,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my bones become brittle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:11</span> Because of all my enemies, people disdain me; </p>
<p class="poetry">my neighbors are appalled by my suffering —</p>
<p class="poetry">those who know me are horrified by my condition; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who see me in the street run away from me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:12</span> I am forgotten, like a dead man no one thinks about; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am regarded as worthless, like a broken jar. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:13</span> For I hear what so many are saying, </p>
<p class="poetry">the terrifying news that comes from every direction. </p>
<p class="poetry">When they plot together against me,</p>
<p class="poetry">they figure out how they can take my life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:14</span> But I trust in you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">I declare, “You are my God!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:15</span> You determine my destiny. </p>
<p class="poetry">Rescue me from the power of my enemies and those who chase me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:16</span> Smile on your servant.</p>
<p class="poetry">Deliver me because of your faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:17</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do not let me be humiliated,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I call out to you.</p>
<p class="poetry">May evil men be humiliated.</p>
<p class="poetry">May they go wailing to the grave. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:18</span> May lying lips be silenced—</p>
<p class="poetry">lips that speak defiantly against the innocent </p>
<p class="poetry">with arrogance and contempt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:19</span> How great is your favor, </p>
<p class="poetry">which you store up for your loyal followers. </p>
<p class="poetry">In plain sight of everyone you bestow it on those who take shelter in you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:20</span> You hide them with you, where they are safe from the attacks of men; </p>
<p class="poetry">you conceal them in a shelter, where they are safe from slanderous attacks. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:21</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> deserves praise </p>
<p class="poetry">for he demonstrated his amazing faithfulness to me when I was besieged by enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:22</span> I jumped to conclusions and said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I am cut off from your presence!” </p>
<p class="poetry">But you heard my plea for mercy when I cried out to you for help. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:23</span> Love the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, all you faithful followers of his!</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protects those who have integrity,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he pays back in full the one who acts arrogantly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:24</span> Be strong and confident, </p>
<p class="poetry">all you who wait on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>