<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 144</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 144</h2><p class="psasuper">By David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my Protector, deserves praise —</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who trains my hands for battle, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my fingers for war, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:2</span> who loves me and is my stronghold,</p>
<p class="poetry">my refuge and my deliverer,</p>
<p class="poetry">my shield and the one in whom I take shelter,</p>
<p class="poetry">who makes nations submit to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:3</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, of what importance is the human race, that you should notice them?</p>
<p class="poetry">Of what importance is mankind, that you should be concerned about them? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:4</span> People are like a vapor,</p>
<p class="poetry">their days like a shadow that disappears. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:5</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, make the sky sink and come down. </p>
<p class="poetry">Touch the mountains and make them smolder. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:6</span> Hurl lightning bolts and scatter the enemy.</p>
<p class="poetry">Shoot your arrows and rout them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:7</span> Reach down from above.</p>
<p class="poetry">Grab me and rescue me from the surging water, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the power of foreigners, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:8</span> who speak lies,</p>
<p class="poetry">and make false promises. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:9</span> O God, I will sing a new song to you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument, I will sing praises to you,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:10</span> the one who delivers kings,</p>
<p class="poetry">and rescued David his servant from a deadly sword. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:11</span> Grab me and rescue me from the power of foreigners, </p>
<p class="poetry">who speak lies,</p>
<p class="poetry">and make false promises. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:12</span> Then our sons will be like plants,</p>
<p class="poetry">that quickly grow to full size. </p>
<p class="poetry">Our daughters will be like corner pillars, </p>
<p class="poetry">carved like those in a palace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:13</span> Our storehouses will be full,</p>
<p class="poetry">providing all kinds of food. </p>
<p class="poetry">Our sheep will multiply by the thousands</p>
<p class="poetry">and fill our pastures. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:14</span> Our cattle will be weighted down with produce. </p>
<p class="poetry">No one will break through our walls,</p>
<p class="poetry">no one will be taken captive,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there will be no terrified cries in our city squares. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">144:15</span> How blessed are the people who experience these things. </p>
<p class="poetry">How blessed are the people whose God is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>