<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 50</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 50</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:1</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Where is your mother’s divorce certificate</p>
<p class="poetry">by which I divorced her?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or to which of my creditors did I sell you? </p>
<p class="poetry">Look, you were sold because of your sins; </p>
<p class="poetry">because of your rebellious acts I divorced your mother. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:2</span> Why does no one challenge me when I come?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why does no one respond when I call? </p>
<p class="poetry">Is my hand too weak to deliver you?</p>
<p class="poetry">Do I lack the power to rescue you?</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, with a mere shout I can dry up the sea;</p>
<p class="poetry">I can turn streams into a desert,</p>
<p class="poetry">so the fish rot away and die </p>
<p class="poetry">from lack of water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:3</span> I can clothe the sky in darkness;</p>
<p class="poetry">I can cover it with sackcloth.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Servant Perseveres</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:4</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has given me the capacity to be his spokesman, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that I know how to help the weary. </p>
<p class="poetry">He wakes me up every morning;</p>
<p class="poetry">he makes me alert so I can listen attentively as disciples do. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:5</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken to me clearly; </p>
<p class="poetry">I have not rebelled,</p>
<p class="poetry">I have not turned back. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:6</span> I offered my back to those who attacked, </p>
<p class="poetry">my jaws to those who tore out my beard;</p>
<p class="poetry">I did not hide my face</p>
<p class="poetry">from insults and spitting. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:7</span> But the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> helps me,</p>
<p class="poetry">so I am not humiliated.</p>
<p class="poetry">For that reason I am steadfastly resolved; </p>
<p class="poetry">I know I will not be put to shame. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:8</span> The one who vindicates me is close by.</p>
<p class="poetry">Who dares to argue with me? Let us confront each other! </p>
<p class="poetry">Who is my accuser? Let him challenge me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:9</span> Look, the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> helps me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Who dares to condemn me?</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, all of them will wear out like clothes;</p>
<p class="poetry">a moth will eat away at them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:10</span> Who among you fears the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who obeys his servant?</p>
<p class="poetry">Whoever walks in deep darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">without light,</p>
<p class="poetry">should trust in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">and rely on his God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:11</span> Look, all of you who start a fire</p>
<p class="poetry">and who equip yourselves with flaming arrows, </p>
<p class="poetry">walk in the light of the fire you started</p>
<p class="poetry">and among the flaming arrows you ignited! </p>
<p class="poetry">This is what you will receive from me: </p>
<p class="poetry">you will lie down in a place of pain. </p>

</body>
</html>