<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 63</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 63</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm of David, written when he was in the Judean wilderness. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:1</span> O God, you are my God. I long for you. </p>
<p class="poetry">My soul thirsts for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">my flesh yearns for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">in a dry and parched land where there is no water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:2</span> Yes, in the sanctuary I have seen you, </p>
<p class="poetry">and witnessed your power and splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:3</span> Because experiencing your loyal love is better than life itself,</p>
<p class="poetry">my lips will praise you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:4</span> For this reason I will praise you while I live;</p>
<p class="poetry">in your name I will lift up my hands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:5</span> As with choice meat you satisfy my soul. </p>
<p class="poetry">My mouth joyfully praises you, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:6</span> whenever I remember you on my bed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and think about you during the nighttime hours. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:7</span> For you are my deliverer; </p>
<p class="poetry">under your wings I rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:8</span> My soul pursues you; </p>
<p class="poetry">your right hand upholds me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:9</span> Enemies seek to destroy my life, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they will descend into the depths of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:10</span> Each one will be handed over to the sword; </p>
<p class="poetry">their corpses will be eaten by jackals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:11</span> But the king will rejoice in God;</p>
<p class="poetry">everyone who takes oaths in his name will boast,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the mouths of those who speak lies will be shut up. </p>

</body>
</html>