<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Exodus 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Exodus<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Song of Triumph</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span>  Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. They said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for he has triumphed gloriously, </p>
<p class="poetry">the horse and its rider he has thrown into the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is my strength and my song, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he has become my salvation.</p>
<p class="poetry">This is my God, and I will praise him, </p>
<p class="poetry">my father’s God, and I will exalt him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is a warrior — </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is his name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:4</span> The chariots of Pharaoh and his army he has thrown into the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his chosen officers were drowned in the Red Sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:5</span> The depths have covered them; </p>
<p class="poetry">they went down to the bottom like a stone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:6</span> Your right hand, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, was majestic in power;</p>
<p class="poetry">your right hand, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, shattered the enemy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:7</span> In the abundance of your majesty you have overthrown </p>
<p class="poetry">those who rise up against you. </p>
<p class="poetry">You sent forth your wrath; </p>
<p class="poetry">it consumed them like stubble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:8</span> By the blast of your nostrils the waters were piled up,</p>
<p class="poetry">the flowing water stood upright like a heap, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the deep waters were solidified in the heart of the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:9</span> The enemy said, ‘I will chase, I will overtake, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will divide the spoil;</p>
<p class="poetry">my desire will be satisfied on them.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will draw my sword, my hand will destroy them.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:10</span> But you blew with your breath, and the sea covered them.</p>
<p class="poetry">They sank like lead in the mighty waters. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:11</span> Who is like you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, among the gods? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who is like you—majestic in holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:12</span> You stretched out your right hand,</p>
<p class="poetry">the earth swallowed them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:13</span> By your loyal love you will lead the people whom you have redeemed;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will guide them by your strength to your holy dwelling place.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:14</span> The nations will hear and tremble;</p>
<p class="poetry">anguish will seize the inhabitants of Philistia. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:15</span> Then the chiefs of Edom will be terrified, </p>
<p class="poetry">trembling will seize the leaders of Moab,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the inhabitants of Canaan will shake. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:16</span> Fear and dread will fall on them;</p>
<p class="poetry">by the greatness of your arm they will be as still as stone </p>
<p class="poetry">until your people pass by, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">until the people whom you have bought pass by.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:17</span> You will bring them in and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the place you made for your residence, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the sanctuary, O Lord, that your hands have established. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will reign forever and ever! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:19</span> For the horses of Pharaoh came with his chariots and his footmen into the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> brought back the waters of the sea on them,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the Israelites walked on dry land in the middle of the sea.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:20</span> Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a hand drum in her hand, and all the women went out after her with hand drums and with dances. <span class="verse">15:21</span> Miriam sang in response to them, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for he has triumphed gloriously; </p>
<p class="poetry">the horse and its rider he has thrown into the sea.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Bitter Water</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:22</span>  Then Moses led Israel to journey away from the Red Sea. They went out to the wilderness of Shur, walked for three days into the wilderness, and found no water. <span class="verse">15:23</span> Then they came to Marah, but they were not able to drink the waters of Marah, because they were bitter. (That is why its name was Marah.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:24</span> So the people murmured against Moses, saying, “What can we drink?” <span class="verse">15:25</span> He cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> showed him a tree. When Moses threw it into the water, the water became safe to drink. There the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made for them a binding ordinance, and there he tested them. <span class="verse">15:26</span> He said, “If you will diligently obey the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, and do what is right in his sight, and pay attention to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, then all the diseases that I brought on the Egyptians I will not bring on you, for I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, am your healer.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:27</span> Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve wells of water and seventy palm trees, and they camped there by the water. </p>

</body>
</html>