<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 65</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 65</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David, a song.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:1</span> Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion.</p>
<p class="poetry">Vows made to you are fulfilled. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:2</span> You hear prayers; </p>
<p class="poetry">all people approach you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:3</span> Our record of sins overwhelms me, </p>
<p class="poetry">but you forgive our acts of rebellion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:4</span> How blessed is the one whom you choose,</p>
<p class="poetry">and allow to live in your palace courts. </p>
<p class="poetry">May we be satisfied with the good things of your house—</p>
<p class="poetry">your holy palace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:5</span> You answer our prayers by performing awesome acts of deliverance,</p>
<p class="poetry">O God, our savior. </p>
<p class="poetry">All the ends of the earth trust in you, </p>
<p class="poetry">as well as those living across the wide seas. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:6</span> You created the mountains by your power, </p>
<p class="poetry">and demonstrated your strength. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:7</span> You calmed the raging seas </p>
<p class="poetry">and their roaring waves,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the commotion made by the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:8</span> Even those living in the remotest areas are awestruck by your acts; </p>
<p class="poetry">you cause those living in the east and west to praise you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:9</span> You visit the earth and give it rain; </p>
<p class="poetry">you make it rich and fertile. </p>
<p class="poetry">God’s streams are full of water; </p>
<p class="poetry">you provide grain for the people of the earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you have prepared the earth in this way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:10</span> You saturate its furrows,</p>
<p class="poetry">and soak its plowed ground. </p>
<p class="poetry">With rain showers you soften its soil, </p>
<p class="poetry">and make its crops grow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:11</span> You crown the year with your good blessings, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you leave abundance in your wake. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:12</span> The pastures in the wilderness glisten with moisture, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the hills are clothed with joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:13</span> The meadows are clothed with sheep,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the valleys are covered with grain.</p>
<p class="poetry">They shout joyfully, yes, they sing. </p>

</body>
</html>