<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 57</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 57</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>al-tashcheth</i> style; a prayer of David, written when he fled from Saul into the cave. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:1</span> Have mercy on me, O God. Have mercy on me.</p>
<p class="poetry">For in you I have taken shelter. </p>
<p class="poetry">In the shadow of your wings I take shelter</p>
<p class="poetry">until trouble passes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:2</span> I cry out for help to God Most High, </p>
<p class="poetry">to the God who vindicates me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:3</span> May he send help from heaven and deliver me </p>
<p class="poetry">from my enemies who hurl insults. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry">May God send his loyal love and faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:4</span> I am surrounded by lions;</p>
<p class="poetry">I lie down among those who want to devour me, </p>
<p class="poetry">men whose teeth are spears and arrows,</p>
<p class="poetry">whose tongues are sharp swords. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:5</span> Rise up above the sky, O God.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your splendor cover the whole earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:6</span> They have prepared a net to trap me; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am discouraged. </p>
<p class="poetry">They have dug a pit for me. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will fall into it. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:7</span> I am determined, O God. I am determined.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing and praise you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:8</span> Awake, my soul! </p>
<p class="poetry">Awake, O stringed instrument and harp!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will wake up at dawn. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:9</span> I will give you thanks before the nations, O Lord.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to you before foreigners. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:10</span> For your loyal love extends beyond the sky, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your faithfulness reaches the clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">57:11</span> Rise up above the sky, O God.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your splendor cover the whole earth. </p>

</body>
</html>