<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 33</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 33</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jacob Meets Esau</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:1</span> Jacob looked up and saw that Esau was coming along with 400 men. So he divided the children among Leah, Rachel, and the two female servants. <span class="verse">33:2</span> He put the servants and their children in front, with Leah and her children behind them, and Rachel and Joseph behind them. <span class="verse">33:3</span> But Jacob himself went on ahead of them, and he bowed toward the ground seven times as he approached his brother. <span class="verse">33:4</span> But Esau ran to meet him, embraced him, hugged his neck, and kissed him. Then they both wept. <span class="verse">33:5</span> When Esau looked up and saw the women and the children, he asked, “Who are these people with you?” Jacob replied, “The children whom God has graciously given your servant.” <span class="verse">33:6</span> The female servants came forward with their children and bowed down. <span class="verse">33:7</span> Then Leah came forward with her children and they bowed down. Finally Joseph and Rachel came forward and bowed down.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:8</span> Esau then asked, “What did you intend by sending all these herds to meet me?” Jacob replied, “To find favor in your sight, my lord.” <span class="verse">33:9</span> But Esau said, “I have plenty, my brother. Keep what belongs to you.” <span class="verse">33:10</span> “No, please take them,” Jacob said. “If I have found favor in your sight, accept my gift from my hand. Now that I have seen your face and you have accepted me, it is as if I have seen the face of God. <span class="verse">33:11</span> Please take my present that was brought to you, for God has been generous to me and I have all I need.” When Jacob urged him, he took it. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:12</span> Then Esau said, “Let’s be on our way! I will go in front of you.” <span class="verse">33:13</span> But Jacob said to him, “My lord knows that the children are young, and that I have to look after the sheep and cattle that are nursing their young. If they are driven too hard for even a single day, all the animals will die. <span class="verse">33:14</span> Let my lord go on ahead of his servant. I will travel more slowly, at the pace of the herds and the children, until I come to my lord at Seir.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:15</span> So Esau said, “Let me leave some of my men with you.” “Why do that?” Jacob replied. “My lord has already been kind enough to me.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:16</span> So that same day Esau made his way back to Seir. <span class="verse">33:17</span> But Jacob traveled to Sukkoth where he built himself a house and made shelters for his livestock. That is why the place was called Sukkoth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:18</span> After he left Paddan Aram, Jacob came safely to the city of Shechem in the land of Canaan, and he camped near the city. <span class="verse">33:19</span> Then he purchased the portion of the field where he had pitched his tent; he bought it from the sons of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for 100 pieces of money. <span class="verse">33:20</span> There he set up an altar and called it “The God of Israel is God.” </p>

</body>
</html>