<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 38</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 38</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm of David, written to get God’s attention. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do not continue to rebuke me in your anger.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not continue to punish me in your raging fury. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:2</span> For your arrows pierce me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your hand presses me down. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:3</span> My whole body is sick because of your judgment; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am deprived of health because of my sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:4</span> For my sins overwhelm me; </p>
<p class="poetry">like a heavy load, they are too much for me to bear.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:5</span> My wounds are infected and starting to smell, </p>
<p class="poetry">because of my foolish sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:6</span> I am dazed and completely humiliated; </p>
<p class="poetry">all day long I walk around mourning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:7</span> For I am overcome with shame, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my whole body is sick. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:8</span> I am numb with pain and severely battered; </p>
<p class="poetry">I groan loudly because of the anxiety I feel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:9</span> O Lord, you understand my heart’s desire; </p>
<p class="poetry">my groaning is not hidden from you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:10</span> My heart beats quickly;</p>
<p class="poetry">my strength leaves me.</p>
<p class="poetry">I can hardly see. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:11</span> Because of my condition, even my friends and acquaintances keep their distance; </p>
<p class="poetry">my neighbors stand far away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:12</span> Those who seek my life try to entrap me; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who want to harm me speak destructive words.</p>
<p class="poetry">All day long they say deceitful things.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:13</span> But I am like a deaf man—I hear nothing;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am like a mute who cannot speak. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:14</span> I am like a man who cannot hear</p>
<p class="poetry">and is incapable of arguing his defense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:15</span> Yet I wait for you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">You will respond, O Lord, my God! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:16</span> I have prayed for deliverance, because otherwise they will gloat over me; </p>
<p class="poetry">when my foot slips they will arrogantly taunt me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:17</span> For I am about to stumble,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I am in constant pain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:18</span> Yes, I confess my wrongdoing,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I am concerned about my sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:19</span> But those who are my enemies for no reason are numerous; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who hate me without cause outnumber me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:20</span> They repay me evil for the good I have done;</p>
<p class="poetry">though I have tried to do good to them, they hurl accusations at me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:21</span> Do not abandon me, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">My God, do not remain far away from me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:22</span> Hurry and help me, O Lord, my deliverer. </p>

</body>
</html>