<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 143</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 143</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, hear my prayer.</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention to my plea for help.</p>
<p class="poetry">Because of your faithfulness and justice, answer me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:2</span> Do not sit in judgment on your servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">for no one alive is innocent before you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:3</span> Certainly my enemies chase me.</p>
<p class="poetry">They smash me into the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry">They force me to live in dark regions, </p>
<p class="poetry">like those who have been dead for ages. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:4</span> My strength leaves me; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am absolutely shocked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:5</span> I recall the old days. </p>
<p class="poetry">I meditate on all you have done;</p>
<p class="poetry">I reflect on your accomplishments. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:6</span> I spread my hands out to you in prayer; </p>
<p class="poetry">my soul thirsts for you in a parched land. (Selah) </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:7</span> Answer me quickly, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">My strength is fading. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not reject me, </p>
<p class="poetry">or I will join those descending into the grave. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:8</span> May I hear about your loyal love in the morning, </p>
<p class="poetry">for I trust in you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Show me the way I should go, </p>
<p class="poetry">because I long for you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:9</span> Rescue me from my enemies, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">I run to you for protection. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:10</span> Teach me to do what pleases you, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you are my God.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your kind presence </p>
<p class="poetry">lead me into a level land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:11</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for the sake of your reputation, revive me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Because of your justice, rescue me from trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">143:12</span> As a demonstration of your loyal love, destroy my enemies.</p>
<p class="poetry">Annihilate all who threaten my life, </p>
<p class="poetry">for I am your servant. </p>

</body>
</html>