<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Listen to this message, you cows of Bashan who live on Mount Samaria!</p>
<p class="poetry">You oppress the poor;</p>
<p class="poetry">you crush the needy.</p>
<p class="poetry">You say to your husbands,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Bring us more to drink!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> confirms this oath by his own holy character: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Certainly the time is approaching </p>
<p class="poetry">when you will be carried away in baskets, </p>
<p class="poetry">every last one of you in fishermen’s pots. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> Each of you will go straight through the gaps in the walls; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will be thrown out toward Harmon.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel has an Appointment with God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> “Go to Bethel and rebel! </p>
<p class="poetry">At Gilgal rebel some more!</p>
<p class="poetry">Bring your sacrifices in the morning,</p>
<p class="poetry">your tithes on the third day! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> Burn a thank offering of bread made with yeast! </p>
<p class="poetry">Make a public display of your voluntary offerings! </p>
<p class="poetry">For you love to do this, you Israelites.”</p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:6</span> “But surely I gave you no food to eat in all your cities;</p>
<p class="poetry">you lacked food everywhere you lived. </p>
<p class="poetry">Still you did not come back to me.”</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:7</span> “I withheld rain from you three months before the harvest. </p>
<p class="poetry">I gave rain to one city, but not to another. </p>
<p class="poetry">One field would get rain, but the field that received no rain dried up.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> People from two or three cities staggered into one city to get water, </p>
<p class="poetry">but remained thirsty. </p>
<p class="poetry">Still you did not come back to me.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:9</span> “I destroyed your crops with blight and disease. </p>
<p class="poetry">Locusts kept devouring your orchards, vineyards, fig trees, and olive trees. </p>
<p class="poetry">Still you did not come back to me.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:10</span> “I sent against you a plague like one of the Egyptian plagues. </p>
<p class="poetry">I killed your young men with the sword, </p>
<p class="poetry">along with the horses you had captured. </p>
<p class="poetry">I made the stench from the corpses rise up into your nostrils. </p>
<p class="poetry">Still you did not come back to me.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:11</span> “I overthrew some of you the way God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. </p>
<p class="poetry">You were like a burning stick snatched from the flames. </p>
<p class="poetry">Still you did not come back to me.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is speaking </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:12</span> “Therefore this is what I will do to you, Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry">Because I will do this to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">prepare to meet your God, Israel!” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">4:13</span> For here he is! </p>
<p class="poetry">He formed the mountains and created the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry">He reveals his plans to men. </p>
<p class="poetry">He turns the dawn into darkness </p>
<p class="poetry">and marches on the heights of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies is his name! </p>

</body>
</html>