<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Regulations for Israel’s Appointed Times</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">23:2</span> “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘These are the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s appointed times which you must proclaim as holy assemblies—my appointed times. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Weekly Sabbath</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:3</span> “‘Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day there must be a Sabbath of complete rest, a holy assembly. You must not do any work; it is a Sabbath to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in all the places where you live.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Passover and Feast of Unleavened Bread </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:4</span> “‘These are the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s appointed times, holy assemblies, which you must proclaim at their appointed time. <span class="verse">23:5</span> In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at twilight, is a Passover offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">23:6</span> Then on the fifteenth day of the same month will be the Feast of Unleavened Bread to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; seven days you must eat unleavened bread. <span class="verse">23:7</span> On the first day there will be a holy assembly for you; you must not do any regular work. <span class="verse">23:8</span> You must present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for seven days, and the seventh day is a holy assembly; you must not do any regular work.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Presentation of Firstfruits </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">23:10</span> “Speak to the  Israelites and tell them, ‘When you enter the land that I am about to give to you and you gather in its harvest, then you must bring the sheaf of the first portion of your harvest to the priest, <span class="verse">23:11</span> and he must wave the sheaf before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> to be accepted for your benefit —on the day after the Sabbath the priest is to wave it. <span class="verse">23:12</span> On the day you wave the sheaf you must also offer a flawless yearling lamb for a burnt offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, <span class="verse">23:13</span> along with its grain offering, two-tenths of an ephah of choice wheat flour mixed with olive oil, as a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, a soothing aroma, and its drink offering, one-fourth of a hin of wine. <span class="verse">23:14</span> You must not eat bread, roasted grain, or fresh grain until this very day, until you bring the offering to your God. This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all the places where you live.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feast of Weeks </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:15</span> “‘You must count for yourselves seven weeks from the day after the Sabbath, from the day you bring the wave offering  sheaf; they must be complete weeks. <span class="verse">23:16</span> You must count fifty days—until the day after the seventh Sabbath—and then you must present a new grain offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">23:17</span> From the places where you live you must bring two loaves of bread for a wave offering; they must be made from two-tenths of an ephah of fine wheat flour, baked with yeast, as firstfruits to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">23:18</span> Along with the loaves of bread, you must also present seven flawless yearling lambs, one young bull, and two rams. They are to be a burnt offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> along with their grain offering and drink offerings, a gift of a soothing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">23:19</span> You must also offer one male goat for a sin offering and two yearling lambs for a peace-offering sacrifice, <span class="verse">23:20</span> and the priest is to wave them—the two lambs —along with the bread of the firstfruits, as a wave offering before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; they will be holy to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for the priest. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:21</span> “‘On this very day you must proclaim an assembly; it is to be a holy assembly for you. You must not do any regular work. This is a perpetual statute in all the places where you live throughout your generations. <span class="verse">23:22</span> When you gather in the harvest of your land, you must not completely harvest the corner of your field, and you must not gather up the gleanings of your harvest. You must leave them for the poor and the resident foreigner. I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feast of Horn Blasts</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:23</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">23:24</span> “Tell the Israelites, ‘In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you must have a complete rest, a memorial announced by loud horn blasts, a holy assembly. <span class="verse">23:25</span> You must not do any regular work, but you must present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Day of Atonement </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:26</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">23:27</span> “The tenth day of this seventh month is the Day of Atonement. It is to be a holy assembly for you, and you must humble yourselves and present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">23:28</span> You must not do any work on this particular day, because it is a day of atonement to make atonement for yourselves before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. <span class="verse">23:29</span> Indeed, any person who does not behave with humility on this particular day will be cut off from his people. <span class="verse">23:30</span> As for any person who does any work on this particular day, I will exterminate that person from the midst of his people — <span class="verse">23:31</span> you must not do any work! This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all the places where you live. <span class="verse">23:32</span> It is a Sabbath of complete rest for you, and you must humble yourselves on the ninth day of the month in the evening, from evening until evening you must observe your Sabbath.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feast of Temporary Shelters</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:33</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">23:34</span> “Tell the Israelites, ‘On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the Feast of Shelters for seven days to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">23:35</span> On the first day is a holy assembly; you must do no regular work. <span class="verse">23:36</span> For seven days you must present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. On the eighth day there is to be a holy assembly for you, and you must present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. It is a solemn assembly day; you must not do any regular work. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:37</span> “‘These are the appointed times of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> that you must proclaim as holy assemblies to present a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—burnt offering, grain offering, sacrifice, and drink offerings, each day according to its regulation, <span class="verse">23:38</span> besides the Sabbaths of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and all your gifts, votive offerings, and freewill offerings which you must give to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:39</span> “‘On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you gather in the produce of the land, you must celebrate a pilgrim festival of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for seven days. On the first day is a complete rest and on the eighth day is complete rest. <span class="verse">23:40</span> On the first day you must take for yourselves branches from majestic trees —palm branches, branches of leafy trees, and willows of the brook—and you must rejoice before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God for seven days. <span class="verse">23:41</span> You must celebrate it as a pilgrim festival to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for seven days in the year. This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations; you must celebrate it in the seventh month. <span class="verse">23:42</span> You must live in temporary shelters for seven days; every native citizen in Israel must live in shelters, <span class="verse">23:43</span> so that your future generations may know that I made the Israelites live in shelters when I brought them out from the land of Egypt. I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:44</span> So Moses spoke to the Israelites about the appointed times of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>