<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The End Arrives</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">7:2</span> “You, son of man—this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says to the land of Israel: An end! The end is coming on the four corners of the land! <span class="verse">7:3</span> The end is now upon you, and I will release my anger against you. I will judge you according to your behavior; I will hold you accountable for all your abominable practices. <span class="verse">7:4</span> My eye will not pity you; I will not spare you. For I will hold you responsible for your behavior, and you will suffer the consequences of your abominable practices. Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:5</span> “This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: A disaster —a one-of-a-kind disaster—is coming! <span class="verse">7:6</span> An end comes —the end comes! It has awakened against you! Look, it is coming! <span class="verse">7:7</span> Doom is coming upon you who live in the land! The time is coming, the day is near. There are sounds of tumult, not shouts of joy, on the mountains. <span class="verse">7:8</span> Soon now I will pour out my rage on you; I will fully vent my anger against you. I will judge you according to your behavior. I will hold you accountable for all your abominable practices. <span class="verse">7:9</span> My eye will not pity you; I will not spare you. For your behavior I will hold you accountable, and you will suffer the consequences of your abominable practices. Then you will know that it is I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who is striking you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:10</span> “Look, the day! Look, it is coming! Doom has gone out! The staff has budded, pride has blossomed! <span class="verse">7:11</span> Violence has grown into a staff that supports wickedness. Not one of them will be left —not from their crowd, not from their wealth, not from their prominence. <span class="verse">7:12</span> The time has come; the day has struck! The customer should not rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for divine wrath comes against their whole crowd. <span class="verse">7:13</span> The customer will no longer pay the seller while both parties are alive, for the vision against their whole crowd will not be revoked. Each person, for his iniquity, will fail to preserve his life. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:14</span> “They have blown the trumpet and everyone is ready, but no one goes to battle, because my anger is against their whole crowd. <span class="verse">7:15</span> The sword is outside; pestilence and famine are inside the house. Whoever is in the open field will die by the sword, and famine and pestilence will consume everyone in the city. <span class="verse">7:16</span> Their survivors will escape to the mountains and become like doves of the valleys ; all of them will moan—each one for his iniquity. <span class="verse">7:17</span> All their hands will hang limp; their knees will be wet with urine. <span class="verse">7:18</span> They will wear sackcloth, terror will cover them; shame will be on all their faces, and all their heads will be shaved bald. <span class="verse">7:19</span> They will discard their silver in the streets, and their gold will be treated like filth. Their silver and gold will not be able to deliver them on the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s fury. They will not satisfy their hunger or fill their stomachs because their wealth was the obstacle leading to their iniquity. <span class="verse">7:20</span> They rendered the beauty of his ornaments into pride, and with it they made their abominable images—their detestable idols. Therefore I will render it filthy to them. <span class="verse">7:21</span> I will give it to foreigners as loot, to the world’s wicked ones as plunder, and they will desecrate it. <span class="verse">7:22</span> I will turn my face away from them, and they will desecrate my treasured place. Vandals will enter it and desecrate it. <span class="verse">7:23</span> (Make the chain, because the land is full of murder and the city is full of violence.) <span class="verse">7:24</span> I will bring the most wicked of the nations, and they will take possession of their houses. I will put an end to the arrogance of the strong, and their sanctuaries will be desecrated. <span class="verse">7:25</span> Terror is coming! They will seek peace, but find none. <span class="verse">7:26</span> Disaster after disaster will come, and one rumor after another. They will seek a vision from a prophet; priestly instruction will disappear, along with counsel from the elders. <span class="verse">7:27</span> The king will mourn and the prince will be clothed with shuddering; the hands of the people of the land will tremble. Based on their behavior I will deal with them, and by their standard of justice I will judge them. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!”</p>

</body>
</html>