<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 83</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 83</h2><p class="psasuper">A song, a psalm of Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:1</span> O God, do not be silent.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not ignore us. Do not be inactive, O God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:2</span> For look, your enemies are making a commotion;</p>
<p class="poetry">those who hate you are hostile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:3</span> They carefully plot against your people,</p>
<p class="poetry">and make plans to harm the ones you cherish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:4</span> They say, “Come on, let’s annihilate them so they are no longer a nation. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then the name of Israel will be remembered no more.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:5</span> Yes, they devise a unified strategy; </p>
<p class="poetry">they form an alliance against you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:6</span> It includes the tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites,</p>
<p class="poetry">Moab and the Hagrites, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:7</span> Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek,</p>
<p class="poetry">Philistia and the inhabitants of Tyre. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:8</span> Even Assyria has allied with them,</p>
<p class="poetry">lending its strength to the descendants of Lot. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:9</span> Do to them as you did to Midian —</p>
<p class="poetry">as you did to Sisera and Jabin at the Kishon River. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:10</span> They were destroyed at Endor; </p>
<p class="poetry">their corpses were like manure on the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:11</span> Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:12</span> who said, “Let’s take over the pastures of God.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:13</span> O my God, make them like dead thistles, </p>
<p class="poetry">like dead weeds blown away by the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:14</span> Like the fire that burns down the forest,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the flames that consume the mountainsides, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:15</span> chase them with your gale winds,</p>
<p class="poetry">and terrify them with your windstorm. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:16</span> Cover their faces with shame,</p>
<p class="poetry">so they might seek you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:17</span> May they be humiliated and continually terrified. </p>
<p class="poetry">May they die in shame. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">83:18</span> Then they will know that you alone are the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">the Most High over all the earth. </p>

</body>
</html>