<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ezekiel’s Commission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> He said to me, “Son of man, stand on your feet and I will speak with you.” <span class="verse">2:2</span> As he spoke to me, a wind came into me and stood me on my feet, and I heard the one speaking to me. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:3</span> He said to me, “Son of man, I am sending you to the house of Israel, to rebellious nations who have rebelled against me; both they and their fathers have revolted against me to this very day. <span class="verse">2:4</span> The people to whom I am sending you are obstinate and hard-hearted, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says.’ <span class="verse">2:5</span> And as for them, whether they listen or not—for they are a rebellious house —they will know that a prophet has been among them. <span class="verse">2:6</span> But you, son of man, do not fear them, and do not fear their words. Even though briers and thorns surround you and you live among scorpions—do not fear their words and do not be terrified of the looks they give you, for they are a rebellious house! <span class="verse">2:7</span> You must speak my words to them whether they listen or not, for they are rebellious. <span class="verse">2:8</span> As for you, son of man, listen to what I am saying to you: Do not rebel like that rebellious house! Open your mouth and eat what I am giving you.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Then I looked and realized a hand was stretched out to me, and in it was a written scroll. <span class="verse">2:10</span> He unrolled it before me, and it had writing on the front and back; written on it were laments, mourning, and woe. </p>

</body>
</html>