<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) John 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conversation with Nicodemus</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Now a certain man, a Pharisee named Nicodemus, who was a member of the Jewish ruling council, <span class="verse">3:2</span> came to Jesus at night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God. For no one could perform the miraculous signs that you do unless God is with him.” <span class="verse">3:3</span> Jesus replied, “I tell you the solemn truth, unless a person is born from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” <span class="verse">3:4</span> Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? He cannot enter his mother’s womb and be born a second time, can he?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:5</span> Jesus answered, “I tell you the solemn truth, unless a person is born of water and spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. <span class="verse">3:6</span> What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the Spirit is spirit. <span class="verse">3:7</span> Do not be amazed that I said to you, ‘You must all be born from above.’ <span class="verse">3:8</span> The wind blows wherever it will, and you hear the sound it makes, but do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Nicodemus replied, “How can these things be?” <span class="verse">3:10</span> Jesus answered, “Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you don’t understand these things? <span class="verse">3:11</span> I tell you the solemn truth, we speak about what we know and testify about what we have seen, but you people do not accept our testimony. <span class="verse">3:12</span> If I have told you people about earthly things and you don’t believe, how will you believe if I tell you about heavenly things? <span class="verse">3:13</span> No one has ascended into heaven except the one who descended from heaven—the Son of Man. <span class="verse">3:14</span> Just as Moses <i>lifted up the serpent</i> <i>in</i> <i>the wilderness</i>, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, <span class="verse">3:15</span> so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:16</span> For this is the way God loved the world: He gave his one and only Son, so that everyone who believes in him will not perish but have eternal life. <span class="verse">3:17</span> For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world should be saved through him. <span class="verse">3:18</span> The one who believes in him is not condemned. The one who does not believe has been condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God. <span class="verse">3:19</span> Now this is the basis for judging: that the light has come into the world and people loved the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds were evil. <span class="verse">3:20</span> For everyone who does evil deeds hates the light and does not come to the light, so that their deeds will not be exposed. <span class="verse">3:21</span> But the one who practices the truth comes to the light, so that it may be plainly evident that his deeds have been done in God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Further Testimony About Jesus by John the Baptist</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:22</span> After this, Jesus and his disciples came into Judean territory, and there he spent time with them and was baptizing. <span class="verse">3:23</span> John was also baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because water was plentiful there, and people were coming to him and being baptized. <span class="verse">3:24</span> (For John had not yet been thrown into prison.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:25</span> Now a dispute came about between some of John’s disciples and a certain Jew concerning ceremonial washing. <span class="verse">3:26</span> So they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, the one who was with you on the other side of the Jordan River, about whom you testified—see, he is baptizing, and everyone is flocking to him!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:27</span> John replied, “No one can receive anything unless it has been given to him from heaven. <span class="verse">3:28</span> You yourselves can testify that I said, ‘I am not the Christ,’ but rather, ‘I have been sent before him.’ <span class="verse">3:29</span> The one who has the bride is the bridegroom. The friend of the bridegroom, who stands by and listens for him, rejoices greatly when he hears the bridegroom’s voice. This then is my joy, and it is complete. <span class="verse">3:30</span> He must become more important while I become less important.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:31</span> The one who comes from above is superior to all. The one who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks about earthly things. The one who comes from heaven is superior to all. <span class="verse">3:32</span> He testifies about what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony. <span class="verse">3:33</span> The one who has accepted his testimony has confirmed clearly that God is truthful. <span class="verse">3:34</span> For the one whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for he does not give the Spirit sparingly. <span class="verse">3:35</span> The Father loves the Son and has placed all things under his authority. <span class="verse">3:36</span> The one who believes in the Son has eternal life. The one who rejects the Son will not see life, but God’s wrath remains on him. </p>

</body>
</html>