<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Solomon Dedicates the Temple</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> When Solomon finished praying, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s splendor filled the temple. <span class="verse">7:2</span> The priests were unable to enter the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s splendor filled the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. <span class="verse">7:3</span> When all the Israelites saw the fire come down and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s splendor over the temple, they got on their knees with their faces downward toward the pavement. They worshiped and gave thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, saying, “Certainly he is good; certainly his loyal love endures!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:4</span> The king and all the people were presenting sacrifices to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">7:5</span> King Solomon sacrificed 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Then the king and all the people dedicated God’s temple. <span class="verse">7:6</span> The priests stood in their assigned spots, along with the Levites who had the musical instruments used for praising the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. (These were the ones King David made for giving thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and which were used by David when he offered praise, saying, “Certainly his loyal love endures.”) Opposite the Levites, the priests were blowing the trumpets, while all Israel stood there. <span class="verse">7:7</span> Solomon consecrated the middle of the courtyard that is in front of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. He offered burnt sacrifices, grain offerings, and the fat from the peace offerings there, because the bronze altar that Solomon had made was too small to hold all these offerings. <span class="verse">7:8</span> At that time Solomon and all Israel with him celebrated a festival for seven days. This great assembly included people from Lebo Hamath in the north to the Stream of Egypt in the south. <span class="verse">7:9</span> On the eighth day they held an assembly, for they had dedicated the altar for seven days and celebrated the festival for seven more days. <span class="verse">7:10</span> On the twenty-third day of the seventh month, Solomon sent the people home. They left happy and contented because of the good the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had done for David, Solomon, and his people Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Gives Solomon a Promise and a Warning</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:11</span> After Solomon finished building the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and the royal palace and accomplished all his plans for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and his royal palace, <span class="verse">7:12</span> the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> appeared to Solomon at night and said to him: “I have answered your prayer and chosen this place to be my temple where sacrifices are to be made. <span class="verse">7:13</span> When I close up the sky so that it doesn’t rain, or command locusts to devour the land’s vegetation, or send a plague among my people, <span class="verse">7:14</span> if my people, who belong to me, humble themselves, pray, seek to please me, and repudiate their sinful practices, then I will respond from heaven, forgive their sin, and heal their land. <span class="verse">7:15</span> Now I will be attentive and responsive to the prayers offered in this place. <span class="verse">7:16</span> Now I have chosen and consecrated this temple by making it my permanent home; I will be constantly present there. <span class="verse">7:17</span> You must serve me as your father David did. Do everything I commanded and obey my rules and regulations. <span class="verse">7:18</span> Then I will establish your dynasty, just as I promised your father David, ‘You will not fail to have a successor ruling over Israel.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:19</span> “But if you people ever turn away from me, fail to obey the regulations and rules I instructed you to keep, and decide to serve and worship other gods, <span class="verse">7:20</span> then I will remove you from my land I have given you, I will abandon this temple I have consecrated with my presence, and I will make you an object of mockery and ridicule among all the nations. <span class="verse">7:21</span> As for this temple, which was once majestic, everyone who passes by it will be shocked and say, ‘Why did the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> do this to this land and this temple?’ <span class="verse">7:22</span> Others will then answer, ‘Because they abandoned the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors, who led them out of Egypt. They embraced other gods whom they worshiped and served. That is why he brought all this disaster down on them.’”</p>

</body>
</html>