<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Micah 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Micah<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Micah Laments Judah’s Sin</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:1</span> Woe is me!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I am like those gathering fruit</p>
<p class="poetry">and those harvesting grapes,</p>
<p class="poetry">when there is no grape cluster to eat</p>
<p class="poetry">and no fresh figs that my stomach craves.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:2</span> Faithful men have disappeared from the land;</p>
<p class="poetry">there are no godly men left. </p>
<p class="poetry">They all wait in ambush to shed blood; </p>
<p class="poetry">they hunt their own brother with a net. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:3</span> They are experts at doing evil; </p>
<p class="poetry">government officials and judges take bribes, </p>
<p class="poetry">prominent men announce what they wish, </p>
<p class="poetry">and then they plan it out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:4</span> The best of them is like a thorn;</p>
<p class="poetry">their godly are like a thorn bush. </p>
<p class="poetry">Woe to your watchmen; </p>
<p class="poetry">your appointed punishment is on the way. </p>
<p class="poetry">The time of their confusion is now. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:5</span> Do not rely on a friend;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not trust a companion!</p>
<p class="poetry">Even with the one who lies in your arms,</p>
<p class="poetry">do not share secrets! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:6</span> For a son thinks his father is a fool,</p>
<p class="poetry">a daughter challenges her mother,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a daughter-in-law her mother-in-law;</p>
<p class="poetry">a man’s enemies are his own family. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> But I will keep watching for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will wait for the God who delivers me.</p>
<p class="poetry">My God will listen to me.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jerusalem Will Be Vindicated</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:8</span> My enemies, do not gloat over me!</p>
<p class="poetry">Though I have fallen, I will get up.</p>
<p class="poetry">Though I sit in darkness, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be my light. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> I must endure the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s fury,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I have sinned against him.</p>
<p class="poetry">But then he will defend my cause </p>
<p class="poetry">and accomplish justice on my behalf.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will lead me out into the light;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will witness his deliverance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:10</span> When my enemies see this, they will be covered with shame.</p>
<p class="poetry">They say to me, “Where is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God?”</p>
<p class="poetry">I will gloat over them; </p>
<p class="poetry">then they will be trampled down </p>
<p class="poetry">like mud in the streets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:11</span> It will be a day for rebuilding your walls;</p>
<p class="poetry">in that day your boundary will be extended. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Closing Prayer</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:12</span> In that day people will come to you </p>
<p class="poetry">from Assyria as far as Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">from Egypt as far as the Euphrates River, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the seacoasts and the mountains. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:13</span> The earth will become desolate</p>
<p class="poetry">because of what its inhabitants have done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:14</span> Shepherd your people with your rod, </p>
<p class="poetry">the flock that belongs to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one that lives alone in a thicket,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the midst of a pastureland. </p>
<p class="poetry">Allow them to graze in Bashan and Gilead, </p>
<p class="poetry">as they did in the old days. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:15</span> “As in the days when you departed from the land of Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will show you miraculous deeds.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:16</span> Nations will see this and be disappointed by all their strength;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will put their hands over their mouths</p>
<p class="poetry">and act as if they were deaf. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:17</span> They will lick the dust like a snake,</p>
<p class="poetry">like serpents crawling on the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will come trembling from their strongholds</p>
<p class="poetry">to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will be terrified of you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:18</span> Who is a God like you? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who forgives sin</p>
<p class="poetry">and pardons the rebellion</p>
<p class="poetry">of those who remain among his people? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who does not stay angry forever,</p>
<p class="poetry">but delights in showing loyal love? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:19</span> Who will once again have mercy on us?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who will conquer our evil deeds?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who will hurl all our sins into the depths of the sea? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:20</span> You will be loyal to Jacob</p>
<p class="poetry">and extend your loyal love to Abraham, </p>
<p class="poetry">which you promised on oath to our ancestors in ancient times. </p>

</body>
</html>