<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Luke 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Luke<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:1</span> Now on the first day of the week, at early dawn, the women went to the tomb, taking the aromatic spices they had prepared. <span class="verse">24:2</span> They found that the stone had been rolled away from the tomb, <span class="verse">24:3</span> but when they went in, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. <span class="verse">24:4</span> While they were perplexed about this, suddenly two men stood beside them in dazzling attire. <span class="verse">24:5</span> The women were terribly frightened and bowed their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, “Why do you look for the living among the dead? <span class="verse">24:6</span> He is not here, but has been raised! Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee, <span class="verse">24:7</span> that the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and on the third day rise again.” <span class="verse">24:8</span> Then the women remembered his words, <span class="verse">24:9</span> and when they returned from the tomb they told all these things to the eleven and to all the rest. <span class="verse">24:10</span> Now it was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them who told these things to the apostles. <span class="verse">24:11</span> But these words seemed like pure nonsense to them, and they did not believe them. <span class="verse">24:12</span> But Peter got up and ran to the tomb. He bent down and saw only the strips of linen cloth; then he went home, wondering what had happened. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Walks the Road to Emmaus</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:13</span> Now that very day two of them were on their way to a village called Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem. <span class="verse">24:14</span> They were talking to each other about all the things that had happened. <span class="verse">24:15</span> While they were talking and debating these things, Jesus himself approached and began to accompany them <span class="verse">24:16</span> (but their eyes were kept from recognizing him). <span class="verse">24:17</span> Then he said to them, “What are these matters you are discussing so intently as you walk along?” And they stood still, looking sad. <span class="verse">24:18</span> Then one of them, named Cleopas, answered him, “Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem who doesn’t know the things that have happened there in these days?” <span class="verse">24:19</span> He said to them, “What things?” “The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene,” they replied, “a man who, with his powerful deeds and words, proved to be a prophet before God and all the people; <span class="verse">24:20</span> and how our chief priests and leaders handed him over to be condemned to death, and crucified him. <span class="verse">24:21</span> But we had hoped that he was the one who was going to redeem Israel. Not only this, but it is now the third day since these things happened. <span class="verse">24:22</span> Furthermore, some women of our group amazed us. They were at the tomb early this morning, <span class="verse">24:23</span> and when they did not find his body, they came back and said they had seen a vision of angels, who said he was alive. <span class="verse">24:24</span> Then some of those who were with us went to the tomb, and found it just as the women had said, but they did not see him.” <span class="verse">24:25</span> So he said to them, “You foolish people —how slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken! <span class="verse">24:26</span> Wasn’t it necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and enter into his glory?” <span class="verse">24:27</span> Then beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them the things written about himself in all the scriptures. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:28</span> So they approached the village where they were going. He acted as though he wanted to go farther, <span class="verse">24:29</span> but they urged him, “Stay with us, because it is getting toward evening and the day is almost done.” So he went in to stay with them. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:30</span> When he had taken his place at the table with them, he took the bread, blessed and broke it, and gave it to them. <span class="verse">24:31</span> At this point their eyes were opened and they recognized him. Then he vanished out of their sight. <span class="verse">24:32</span> They said to each other, “Didn’t our hearts burn within us while he was speaking with us on the road, while he was explaining the scriptures to us?” <span class="verse">24:33</span> So they got up that very hour and returned to Jerusalem. They found the eleven and those with them gathered together <span class="verse">24:34</span> and saying, “The Lord has really risen, and has appeared to Simon!” <span class="verse">24:35</span> Then they told what had happened on the road, and how they recognized him when he broke the bread. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Makes a Final Appearance </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:36</span> While they were saying these things, Jesus himself stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.” <span class="verse">24:37</span> But they were startled and terrified, thinking they saw a ghost. <span class="verse">24:38</span> Then he said to them, “Why are you frightened, and why do doubts arise in your hearts? <span class="verse">24:39</span> Look at my hands and my feet; it’s me! Touch me and see; a ghost does not have flesh and bones like you see I have.” <span class="verse">24:40</span> When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet. <span class="verse">24:41</span> And while they still could not believe it (because of their joy) and were amazed, he said to them, “Do you have anything here to eat?” <span class="verse">24:42</span> So they gave him a piece of broiled fish, <span class="verse">24:43</span> and he took it and ate it in front of them. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Final Commission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:44</span> Then he said to them, “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the law of Moses and the prophets and the psalms must be fulfilled.” <span class="verse">24:45</span> Then he opened their minds so they could understand the scriptures, <span class="verse">24:46</span> and said to them, “Thus it stands written that the Christ would suffer and would rise from the dead on the third day, <span class="verse">24:47</span> and repentance for the forgiveness of sins would be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem. <span class="verse">24:48</span> You are witnesses of these things. <span class="verse">24:49</span> And look, I am sending you what my Father promised. But stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Departure</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:50</span> Then Jesus led them out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he blessed them. <span class="verse">24:51</span> Now during the blessing he departed and was taken up into heaven. <span class="verse">24:52</span> So they worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, <span class="verse">24:53</span> and were continually in the temple courts blessing God. </p>

</body>
</html>