<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:1</span> Send rams as tribute to the ruler of the land, </p>
<p class="poetry">from Sela in the wilderness </p>
<p class="poetry">to the hill of Daughter Zion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:2</span> At the fords of the Arnon </p>
<p class="poetry">the Moabite women are like a bird</p>
<p class="poetry">that flies about when forced from its nest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:3</span> “Bring a plan, make a decision. </p>
<p class="poetry">Provide some shade in the middle of the day. </p>
<p class="poetry">Hide the fugitives! Do not betray the one who tries to escape. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:4</span> Please let the Moabite fugitives live among you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Hide them from the destroyer!”</p>
<p class="poetry">Certainly the one who applies pressure will cease; </p>
<p class="poetry">the destroyer will come to an end;</p>
<p class="poetry">those who trample will disappear from the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:5</span> Then a trustworthy king will be established;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will rule in a reliable manner,</p>
<p class="poetry">this one from David’s family. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will be sure to make just decisions</p>
<p class="poetry">and will be experienced in executing justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:6</span> We have heard about Moab’s pride—</p>
<p class="poetry">their great arrogance—</p>
<p class="poetry">their boasting, pride, and excess. </p>
<p class="poetry">But their boastful claims are empty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:7</span> So Moab wails over its demise —</p>
<p class="poetry">they all wail!</p>
<p class="poetry">Completely devastated, they moan</p>
<p class="poetry">about what has happened to the raisin cakes of Kir Hareseth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:8</span> For the fields of Heshbon are dried up,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the vines of Sibmah.</p>
<p class="poetry">The rulers of the nations trample all over its vines,</p>
<p class="poetry">which reach Jazer and spread to the wilderness;</p>
<p class="poetry">their shoots spread out and cross the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:9</span> So I weep along with Jazer </p>
<p class="poetry">over the vines of Sibmah.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will saturate you with my tears, Heshbon and Elealeh,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the conquering invaders shout triumphantly</p>
<p class="poetry">over your fruit and crops. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:10</span> Joy and happiness disappear from the orchards,</p>
<p class="poetry">and in the vineyards no one rejoices or shouts;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one treads out juice in the wine vats —</p>
<p class="poetry">I have brought the joyful shouts to an end. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:11</span> So my heart constantly sighs for Moab, like the strumming of a harp, </p>
<p class="poetry">my inner being sighs for Kir Hareseth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:12</span> When the Moabites plead with all their might at their high places, </p>
<p class="poetry">and enter their temples to pray, their prayers will be ineffective. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:13</span> This is the message the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> previously announced about Moab. <span class="verse">16:14</span> Now the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> makes this announcement: “Within exactly three years Moab’s splendor will disappear, along with all her many people; there will be only a few insignificant survivors left.” </p>

</body>
</html>