<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Micah 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Micah<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> This is the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message that came to Micah of Moresheth during the time of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Judge is Coming</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> Listen, all you nations! </p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention, all inhabitants of earth! </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will act as a witness against you;</p>
<p class="poetry">the Lord will accuse you from his majestic palace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> Look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is coming out of his dwelling place!</p>
<p class="poetry">He will descend and march on the earth’s mountaintops! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> The mountains will crumble beneath him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the valleys will split apart </p>
<p class="poetry">like wax before a fire,</p>
<p class="poetry">like water dumped down a steep slope.</p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> All this is because of Jacob’s rebellion</p>
<p class="poetry">and the sins of the nation of Israel.</p>
<p class="poetry">And just what is Jacob’s rebellion?</p>
<p class="poetry">Isn’t it Samaria’s doings? </p>
<p class="poetry">And what is Judah’s sin? </p>
<p class="poetry">Isn’t it Jerusalem’s doings? </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">1:6</span> “I will turn Samaria into a heap of ruins in an open field,</p>
<p class="poetry">into a place for planting vineyards.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will dump the rubble of her walls down into the valley</p>
<p class="poetry">and lay bare her foundations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> All her carved idols will be smashed to pieces;</p>
<p class="poetry">all her metal cult statues will be destroyed by fire. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make a waste heap of all her images.</p>
<p class="poetry">Since she gathered the metal as a prostitute collects her wages,</p>
<p class="poetry">the idols will become a prostitute’s wages again.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> For this reason I will mourn and wail;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will walk around barefoot and without my outer garments. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will howl like a wild dog, </p>
<p class="poetry">and screech like an owl. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> For Samaria’s disease is incurable.</p>
<p class="poetry">It has infected Judah;</p>
<p class="poetry">it has spread to the leadership of my people</p>
<p class="poetry">and even to Jerusalem! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> Don’t spread the news in Gath. </p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t shed even a single tear. </p>
<p class="poetry">In Beth Leaphrah roll about in mourning in the dust! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> Residents of Shaphir, pass by in nakedness and humiliation!</p>
<p class="poetry">The residents of Zaanan have not escaped. </p>
<p class="poetry">Beth Ezel mourns, </p>
<p class="poetry">“He takes from you what he desires.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> Indeed, the residents of Maroth hope for something good to happen, </p>
<p class="poetry">though the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has sent disaster against the city of Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> Residents of Lachish, hitch the horses to the chariots!</p>
<p class="poetry">You influenced Daughter Zion to sin, </p>
<p class="poetry">for Israel’s rebellious deeds can be traced back to you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> Therefore you will have to say farewell to Moresheth Gath.</p>
<p class="poetry">The residents of Achzib will be as disappointing</p>
<p class="poetry">as a dried up well to the kings of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> Residents of Mareshah, a conqueror will attack you; </p>
<p class="poetry">the leaders of Israel shall flee to Adullam. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> Shave your heads bald as you mourn for the children you love; </p>
<p class="poetry">shave your foreheads as bald as an eagle, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they are taken from you into exile. </p>

</body>
</html>