<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 19</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:1</span> The heavens declare the glory of God; </p>
<p class="poetry">the sky displays his handiwork. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:2</span> Day after day it speaks out; </p>
<p class="poetry">night after night it reveals his greatness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:3</span> There is no actual speech or word,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor is its voice literally heard. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:4</span> Yet its voice echoes throughout the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">its words carry to the distant horizon. </p>
<p class="poetry">In the sky he has pitched a tent for the sun. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:5</span> Like a bridegroom it emerges from its chamber; </p>
<p class="poetry">like a strong man it enjoys running its course. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:6</span> It emerges from the distant horizon, </p>
<p class="poetry">and goes from one end of the sky to the other; </p>
<p class="poetry">nothing can escape its heat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:7</span> The law of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is perfect</p>
<p class="poetry">and preserves one’s life. </p>
<p class="poetry">The rules set down by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> are reliable </p>
<p class="poetry">and impart wisdom to the inexperienced. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s precepts are fair </p>
<p class="poetry">and make one joyful. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s commands are pure </p>
<p class="poetry">and give insight for life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:9</span> The commands to fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> are right </p>
<p class="poetry">and endure forever. </p>
<p class="poetry">The judgments given by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> are trustworthy</p>
<p class="poetry">and absolutely just. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:10</span> They are of greater value than gold,</p>
<p class="poetry">than even a great amount of pure gold;</p>
<p class="poetry">they bring greater delight than honey,</p>
<p class="poetry">than even the sweetest honey from a honeycomb. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:11</span> Yes, your servant finds moral guidance there; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who obey them receive a rich reward. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:12</span> Who can know all his errors? </p>
<p class="poetry">Please do not punish me for sins I am unaware of. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:13</span> Moreover, keep me from committing flagrant sins; </p>
<p class="poetry">do not allow such sins to control me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then I will be blameless,</p>
<p class="poetry">and innocent of blatant rebellion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:14</span> May my words and my thoughts</p>
<p class="poetry">be acceptable in your sight, </p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my sheltering rock and my redeemer. </p>

</body>
</html>