<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 33</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 33</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu Invites Job’s Attention</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:1</span> “But now, O Job, listen to my words,</p>
<p class="poetry">and hear everything I have to say. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:2</span> See now, I have opened my mouth;</p>
<p class="poetry">my tongue in my mouth has spoken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:3</span> My words come from the uprightness of my heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my lips will utter knowledge sincerely. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:4</span> The Spirit of God has made me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the breath of the Almighty gives me life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:5</span> Reply to me, if you can;</p>
<p class="poetry">set your arguments in order before me</p>
<p class="poetry">and take your stand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:6</span> Look, I am just like you in relation to God;</p>
<p class="poetry">I too have been molded from clay. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:7</span> Therefore no fear of me should terrify you,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor should my pressure be heavy on you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu Rejects Job’s Plea of Innocence</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:8</span> “Indeed, you have said in my hearing </p>
<p class="poetry">(I heard the sound of the words!): </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:9</span>  ‘I am pure, without transgression;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am clean and have no iniquity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:10</span>  Yet God finds occasions with me;</p>
<p class="poetry">he regards me as his enemy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:11</span>  He puts my feet in shackles;</p>
<p class="poetry">he watches closely all my paths.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:12</span> Now in this, you are not right—I answer you, </p>
<p class="poetry">for God is greater than a human being. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:13</span> Why do you contend against him,</p>
<p class="poetry">that he does not answer all a person’s words? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu Disagrees With Job’s View of God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:14</span> “For God speaks, the first time in one way,</p>
<p class="poetry">the second time in another, </p>
<p class="poetry">though a person does not perceive it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:15</span> In a dream, a night vision,</p>
<p class="poetry">when deep sleep falls on people</p>
<p class="poetry">as they sleep in their beds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:16</span> Then he gives a revelation to people,</p>
<p class="poetry">and terrifies them with warnings, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:17</span> to turn a person from his sin, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to cover a person’s pride. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:18</span> He spares a person’s life from corruption, </p>
<p class="poetry">his very life from crossing over the river. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:19</span> Or a person is chastened by pain on his bed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and with the continual strife of his bones, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:20</span> so that his life loathes food,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his soul rejects appetizing fare. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:21</span> His flesh wastes away from sight,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his bones, which were not seen, </p>
<p class="poetry">are easily visible. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:22</span> He draws near to the place of corruption,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his life to the messengers of death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:23</span> If there is an angel beside him,</p>
<p class="poetry">one mediator out of a thousand,</p>
<p class="poetry">to tell a person what constitutes his uprightness; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:24</span> and if God is gracious to him and says,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Spare him from going down </p>
<p class="poetry">to the place of corruption,</p>
<p class="poetry">I have found a ransom for him,’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:25</span> then his flesh is restored like a youth’s;</p>
<p class="poetry">he returns to the days of his youthful vigor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:26</span> He entreats God, and God delights in him,</p>
<p class="poetry">he sees God’s face with rejoicing,</p>
<p class="poetry">and God restores to him his righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:27</span> That person sings to others, saying:</p>
<p class="poetry">‘I have sinned and falsified what is right,</p>
<p class="poetry">but I was not punished according to what I deserved. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:28</span> He redeemed my life </p>
<p class="poetry">from going down to the place of corruption,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my life sees the light!’ </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu’s Appeal to Job </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:29</span> “Indeed, God does all these things,</p>
<p class="poetry">twice, three times, in his dealings with a person, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:30</span> to turn back his life from the place of corruption,</p>
<p class="poetry">that he may be enlightened with the light of life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:31</span> Pay attention, Job—listen to me;</p>
<p class="poetry">be silent, and I will speak. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:32</span> If you have any words, reply to me;</p>
<p class="poetry">speak, for I want to justify you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:33</span> If not, you listen to me;</p>
<p class="poetry">be silent, and I will teach you wisdom.” </p>

</body>
</html>