<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 140</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 140</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, rescue me from wicked men. </p>
<p class="poetry">Protect me from violent men, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:2</span> who plan ways to harm me. </p>
<p class="poetry">All day long they stir up conflict. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:3</span> Their tongues wound like a serpent; </p>
<p class="poetry">a viper’s venom is behind their lips. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:4</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, shelter me from the power of the wicked.</p>
<p class="poetry">Protect me from violent men,</p>
<p class="poetry">who plan to knock me over. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:5</span> Proud men hide a snare for me;</p>
<p class="poetry">evil men spread a net by the path.</p>
<p class="poetry">They set traps for me. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:6</span> I say to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “You are my God.”</p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, pay attention to my plea for mercy.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:7</span> O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my strong deliverer, </p>
<p class="poetry">you shield my head in the day of battle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:8</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do not let the wicked have their way. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not allow their plan to succeed when they attack. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:9</span> As for the heads of those who surround me—</p>
<p class="poetry">may the harm done by their lips overwhelm them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:10</span> May he rain down fiery coals upon them.</p>
<p class="poetry">May he throw them into the fire.</p>
<p class="poetry">From bottomless pits they will not escape. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:11</span> A slanderer will not endure on the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">calamity will hunt down a violent man and strike him down. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:12</span> I know that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> defends the cause of the oppressed</p>
<p class="poetry">and vindicates the poor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">140:13</span> Certainly the godly will give thanks to your name;</p>
<p class="poetry">the morally upright will live in your presence. </p>

</body>
</html>