<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Mark 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Tenants </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> Then he began to speak to them in parables: “A man planted a vineyard. He put a fence around it, dug a pit for its winepress, and built a watchtower. Then he leased it to tenant farmers and went on a journey. <span class="verse">12:2</span> At harvest time he sent a slave to the tenants to collect from them his portion of the crop. <span class="verse">12:3</span> But those tenants seized his slave, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed. <span class="verse">12:4</span> So he sent another slave to them again. This one they struck on the head and treated outrageously. <span class="verse">12:5</span> He sent another, and that one they killed. This happened to many others, some of whom were beaten, others killed. <span class="verse">12:6</span> He had one left, his one dear son. Finally he sent him to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’ <span class="verse">12:7</span> But those tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him and the inheritance will be ours!’ <span class="verse">12:8</span> So they seized him, killed him, and threw his body out of the vineyard. <span class="verse">12:9</span> What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others. <span class="verse">12:10</span> Have you not read this scripture:</p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<b><i>The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone</i>.</b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">12:11</span> <b><i>This is from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes</i></b>’?” </p>
<p class="bodyblock"><span class="verse">12:12</span> Now they wanted to arrest him (but they feared the crowd), because they realized that he told this parable against them. So they left him and went away. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paying Taxes to Caesar </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:13</span> Then they sent some of the Pharisees and Herodians to trap him with his own words. <span class="verse">12:14</span> When they came they said to him, “Teacher, we know that you are truthful and do not court anyone’s favor, because you show no partiality but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not? Should we pay or shouldn’t we?” <span class="verse">12:15</span> But he saw through their hypocrisy and said to them, “Why are you testing me? Bring me a denarius and let me look at it.” <span class="verse">12:16</span> So they brought one, and he said to them, “Whose image is this, and whose inscription?” They replied, “Caesar’s.” <span class="verse">12:17</span> Then Jesus said to them, “Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” And they were utterly amazed at him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Marriage and the Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:18</span> Sadducees (who say there is no resurrection) also came to him and asked him, <span class="verse">12:19</span> “Teacher, Moses wrote for us: ‘<i><b>If a man</b>’<b>s brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, that man</b></i> <b><i>must marry</i></b> <b><i>the widow and father children</i></b> <b><i>for his brother</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">12:20</span> There were seven brothers. The first one married, and when he died he had no children. <span class="verse">12:21</span> The second married her and died without any children, and likewise the third. <span class="verse">12:22</span> None of the seven had children. Finally, the woman died too. <span class="verse">12:23</span> In the resurrection, when they rise again, whose wife will she be? For all seven had married her.” <span class="verse">12:24</span> Jesus said to them, “Aren’t you deceived for this reason, because you don’t know the scriptures or the power of God? <span class="verse">12:25</span> For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. <span class="verse">12:26</span> Now as for the dead being raised, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the passage about the bush, how God said to him, ‘<b><i>I am the God of Abraham, the</i></b> <b><i>God</i> <i>of Isaac, and the God of Jacob</i></b>’? <span class="verse">12:27</span> He is not the God of the dead but of the living. You are badly mistaken!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Greatest Commandment </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:28</span> Now one of the experts in the law came and heard them debating. When he saw that Jesus answered them well, he asked him, “Which commandment is the most important of all?” <span class="verse">12:29</span> Jesus answered, “The most important is: ‘<i><b>Listen, Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one</b></i>. <span class="verse">12:30</span> <b><i>Love</i></b> <b><i>the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength</i></b>.’ <span class="verse">12:31</span> The second is: ‘<b><i>Love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.” <span class="verse">12:32</span> The expert in the law said to him, “That is true, Teacher; you are right to say that <b><i>he is one, and there is no one else besides him</i></b>. <span class="verse">12:33</span> And <b><i>to love him with all your heart, with all your mind, and with all your strength</i></b> and <b><i>to love your neighbor as yourself</i></b> is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.” <span class="verse">12:34</span> When Jesus saw that he had answered thoughtfully, he said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” Then no one dared any longer to question him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Messiah: David’s Son and Lord </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:35</span> While Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he said, “How is it that the experts in the law say that the Christ is David’s son? <span class="verse">12:36</span> David himself, by the Holy Spirit, said,</p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<b><i>The Lord said to my lord,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<b><i>Sit at my right hand,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>until I put your enemies under your feet</b></i>.”’ </p>
<p class="bodyblock"><span class="verse">12:37</span> If David himself calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?” And the large crowd was listening to him with delight. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warnings About Experts in the Law</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:38</span> In his teaching Jesus also said, “Watch out for the experts in the law. They like walking around in long robes and elaborate greetings in the marketplaces, <span class="verse">12:39</span> and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets. <span class="verse">12:40</span> They devour widows’ property, and as a show make long prayers. These men will receive a more severe punishment.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Widow’s Offering </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:41</span> Then he sat down opposite the offering box, and watched the crowd putting coins into it. Many rich people were throwing in large amounts. <span class="verse">12:42</span> And a poor widow came and put in two small copper coins, worth less than a penny. <span class="verse">12:43</span> He called his disciples and said to them, “I tell you the truth, this poor widow has put more into the offering box than all the others. <span class="verse">12:44</span> For they all gave out of their wealth. But she, out of her poverty, put in what she had to live on, everything she had.” </p>

</body>
</html>