<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Reversal of the Exodus: Return to Egypt and Exile in Assyria </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:1</span> “When Israel was a young man, I loved him like a son, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I summoned my son out of Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:2</span> But the more I summoned them,</p>
<p class="poetry">the farther they departed from me. </p>
<p class="poetry">They sacrificed to the Baal idols</p>
<p class="poetry">and burned incense to images. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:3</span> Yet it was I who led Ephraim;</p>
<p class="poetry">I took them by the arm,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they did not acknowledge </p>
<p class="poetry">that I had healed them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:4</span> I drew them with leather cords, </p>
<p class="poetry">with straps of hide; </p>
<p class="poetry">I lifted the yoke from their neck, </p>
<p class="poetry">and gently fed them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:5</span> They will return to Egypt! </p>
<p class="poetry">Assyria will rule over them </p>
<p class="poetry">because they refuse to repent! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:6</span> A sword will flash in their cities,</p>
<p class="poetry">it will destroy the bars of their city gates,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will devour them in their fortresses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:7</span> My people are obsessed with turning away from me; </p>
<p class="poetry">they call to Baal, but he will never exalt them!</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Divine Dilemma: Judgment or Mercy?</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:8</span> “How can I give you up, O Ephraim?</p>
<p class="poetry">How can I surrender you, O Israel?</p>
<p class="poetry">How can I treat you like Admah?</p>
<p class="poetry">How can I make you like Zeboyim?</p>
<p class="poetry">I have had a change of heart. </p>
<p class="poetry">All my tender compassions are aroused. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:9</span> I cannot carry out my fierce anger!</p>
<p class="poetry">I cannot totally destroy Ephraim!</p>
<p class="poetry">Because I am God, and not man—the Holy One among you—</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not come in wrath!</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Will Restore the Exiles to Israel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:10</span> “He will roar like a lion, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they will follow the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">when he roars, </p>
<p class="poetry">his children will come trembling from the west. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:11</span> They will return in fear and trembling </p>
<p class="poetry">like birds from Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">like doves from Assyria,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will settle them in their homes,” declares the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Lawsuit against Israel: Breach of Covenant</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:12</span> (12:1) Ephraim has surrounded me with lies;</p>
<p class="poetry">the house of Israel has surrounded me with deceit.</p>
<p class="poetry">But Judah still roams about with God;</p>
<p class="poetry">he remains faithful to the Holy One. </p>

</body>
</html>