<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Mark 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing of a Demoniac </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> So they came to the other side of the lake, to the region of the Gerasenes. <span class="verse">5:2</span> Just as Jesus was getting out of the boat, a man with an unclean spirit came from the tombs and met him. <span class="verse">5:3</span> He lived among the tombs, and no one could bind him anymore, not even with a chain. <span class="verse">5:4</span> For his hands and feet had often been bound with chains and shackles, but he had torn the chains apart and broken the shackles in pieces. No one was strong enough to subdue him. <span class="verse">5:5</span> Each night and every day among the tombs and in the mountains, he would cry out and cut himself with stones. <span class="verse">5:6</span> When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed down before him. <span class="verse">5:7</span> Then he cried out with a loud voice, “Leave me alone, Jesus, Son of the Most High God! I implore you by God —do not torment me!” <span class="verse">5:8</span> (For Jesus had said to him, “Come out of that man, you unclean spirit!”) <span class="verse">5:9</span> Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” And he said, “My name is Legion, for we are many.” <span class="verse">5:10</span> He begged Jesus repeatedly not to send them out of the region. <span class="verse">5:11</span> There on the hillside, a great herd of pigs was feeding. <span class="verse">5:12</span> And the demonic spirits begged him, “Send us into the pigs. Let us enter them.” <span class="verse">5:13</span> Jesus gave them permission. So the unclean spirits came out and went into the pigs. Then the<sup></sup> herd rushed down the steep slope into the lake, and about 2,000 were drowned in the lake. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:14</span> Now the herdsmen ran off and spread the news in the town and countryside, and the people went out to see what had happened. <span class="verse">5:15</span> They came to Jesus and saw the demon-possessed man sitting there, clothed and in his right mind—the one who had the “Legion”—and they were afraid. <span class="verse">5:16</span> Those who had seen what had happened to the demon-possessed man reported it, and they also told about the pigs. <span class="verse">5:17</span> Then they began to beg Jesus to leave their region. <span class="verse">5:18</span> As he was getting into the boat the man who had been demon-possessed asked if he could go with him. <span class="verse">5:19</span> But Jesus did not permit him to do so. Instead, he said to him, “Go to your home and to your people and tell them what the Lord has done for you, that he had mercy on you.” <span class="verse">5:20</span> So he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis what Jesus had done for him, and all were amazed. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Restoration and Healing </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:21</span> When Jesus had crossed again in a boat to the other side, a large crowd gathered around him, and he was by the sea. <span class="verse">5:22</span> Then one of the synagogue leaders, named Jairus, came up, and when he saw Jesus, he fell at his feet. <span class="verse">5:23</span> He asked him urgently, “My little daughter is near death. Come and lay your hands on her so that she may be healed and live.” <span class="verse">5:24</span> Jesus went with him, and a large crowd followed and pressed around him. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:25</span> Now a woman was there who had been suffering from a hemorrhage for twelve years. <span class="verse">5:26</span> She had endured a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all that she had. Yet instead of getting better, she grew worse. <span class="verse">5:27</span> When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak, <span class="verse">5:28</span> for she kept saying, “If only I touch his clothes, I will be healed.” <span class="verse">5:29</span> At once the bleeding stopped, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her disease. <span class="verse">5:30</span> Jesus knew at once that power had gone out from him. He turned around in the crowd and said, “Who touched my clothes?” <span class="verse">5:31</span> His disciples said to him, “You see the crowd pressing against you and you say, ‘Who touched me?’” <span class="verse">5:32</span> But he looked around to see who had done it. <span class="verse">5:33</span> Then the woman, with fear and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth. <span class="verse">5:34</span> He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be healed of your disease.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:35</span> While he was still speaking, people came from the synagogue leader’s house saying, “Your daughter has died. Why trouble the teacher any longer?” <span class="verse">5:36</span> But Jesus, paying no attention to what was said, told the synagogue leader, “Do not be afraid; just believe.” <span class="verse">5:37</span> He did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James. <span class="verse">5:38</span> They came to the house of the synagogue leader where he saw noisy confusion and people weeping and wailing loudly. <span class="verse">5:39</span> When he entered he said to them, “Why are you distressed and weeping? The child is not dead but asleep!” <span class="verse">5:40</span> And they began making fun of him. But he forced them all outside, and he took the child’s father and mother and his own companions and went into the room where the child was. <span class="verse">5:41</span> Then, gently taking the child by the hand, he said to her, “<i>Talitha koum</i>,” which means, “Little girl, I say to you, get up.” <span class="verse">5:42</span> The girl got up at once and began to walk around (she was twelve years old). They were completely astonished at this. <span class="verse">5:43</span> He strictly ordered that no one should know about this, and told them to give her something to eat. </p>

</body>
</html>