<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Daily Offerings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:1</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">28:2</span> “Command the Israelites: ‘With regard to my offering, be sure to offer my food for my offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to me at its appointed time.’ <span class="verse">28:3</span> You will say to them, ‘This is the offering made by fire that you must offer to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>: two unblemished lambs one year old each day for a continual burnt offering. <span class="verse">28:4</span> The first lamb you must offer in the morning, and the second lamb you must offer in the late afternoon, <span class="verse">28:5</span> with one-tenth of an ephah of finely ground flour as a grain offering mixed with one-quarter of a hin of pressed olive oil. <span class="verse">28:6</span> It is a continual burnt offering that was instituted on Mount Sinai as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:7</span> “‘And its drink offering must be one-quarter of a hin for each lamb. You must pour out the strong drink as a drink offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in the Holy Place. <span class="verse">28:8</span> And the second lamb you must offer in the late afternoon; just as you offered the grain offering and drink offering in the morning, you must offer it as an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Weekly Offerings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:9</span> “‘On the Sabbath day, you must offer two unblemished lambs a year old, and two-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour as a grain offering, mixed with olive oil, along with its drink offering. <span class="verse">28:10</span> This is the burnt offering for every Sabbath, besides the continual burnt offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Monthly Offerings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:11</span> “‘On the first day of each month you must offer as a burnt offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> two young bulls, one ram, and seven unblemished lambs a year old, <span class="verse">28:12</span> with three-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering for each bull, and two-tenths of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering for the ram, <span class="verse">28:13</span> and one-tenth of an ephah of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering for each lamb, as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">28:14</span> For their drink offerings, include half a hin of wine with each bull, one-third of a hin for the ram, and one-fourth of a hin for each lamb. This is the burnt offering for each month throughout the months of the year. <span class="verse">28:15</span> And one male goat must be offered to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> as a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Passover</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:16</span> “‘On the fourteenth day of the first month is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s Passover. <span class="verse">28:17</span> And on the fifteenth day of this month is the festival. For seven days bread made without yeast must be eaten. <span class="verse">28:18</span> And on the first day there is to be a holy assembly; you must do no ordinary work on it.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:19</span> “‘But you must offer to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> an offering made by fire, a burnt offering of two young bulls, one ram, and seven lambs one year old; they must all be unblemished. <span class="verse">28:20</span> And their grain offering is to be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil. For each bull you must offer three-tenths of an ephah, and two-tenths for the ram. <span class="verse">28:21</span> For each of the seven lambs you are to offer one-tenth of an ephah, <span class="verse">28:22</span> as well as one goat for a purification offering, to make atonement for you. <span class="verse">28:23</span> You must offer these in addition to the burnt offering in the morning that is for a continual burnt offering. <span class="verse">28:24</span> In this manner you must offer daily throughout the seven days the food of the sacrifice made by fire as a sweet aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. It is to be offered in addition to the continual burnt offering and its drink offering. <span class="verse">28:25</span> On the seventh day you are to have a holy assembly, you must do no regular work. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Firstfruits</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:26</span> “‘Also, on the day of the firstfruits, when you bring a new grain offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> during your Feast of Weeks, you are to have a holy assembly. You must do no ordinary work. <span class="verse">28:27</span> But you must offer as the burnt offering, as a sweet aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, two young bulls, one ram, seven lambs one year old, <span class="verse">28:28</span> with their grain offering of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil: three-tenths of an ephah for each bull, two-tenths for the one ram, <span class="verse">28:29</span> with one-tenth for each of the seven lambs, <span class="verse">28:30</span> as well as one male goat to make an atonement for you. <span class="verse">28:31</span> You are to offer them with their drink offerings in addition to the continual burnt offering and its grain offering—they must be unblemished. </p>

</body>
</html>