<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 41</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 41</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Description of Leviathan</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:1</span> (40:25) “Can you pull in Leviathan with a hook,</p>
<p class="poetry">and tie down its tongue with a rope? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:2</span> Can you put a cord through its nose,</p>
<p class="poetry">or pierce its jaw with a hook? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:3</span> Will it make numerous supplications to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">will it speak to you with tender words? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:4</span> Will it make a pact with you,</p>
<p class="poetry">so you could take it as your slave for life? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:5</span> Can you play with it, like a bird,</p>
<p class="poetry">or tie it on a leash for your girls? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:6</span> Will partners bargain for it?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will they divide it up among the merchants? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:7</span> Can you fill its hide with harpoons</p>
<p class="poetry">or its head with fishing spears? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:8</span> If you lay your hand on it,</p>
<p class="poetry">you will remember the fight. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not do it again! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:9</span> (41:1) See, his expectation is wrong, </p>
<p class="poetry">he is laid low even at the sight of it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:10</span> Is it not fierce when it is awakened?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who is he, then, who can stand before it? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:11</span> Who has confronted me that I should repay? </p>
<p class="poetry">Everything under heaven belongs to me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:12</span> I will not keep silent about its limbs,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the extent of its might, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the grace of its arrangement. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:13</span> Who can uncover its outer covering? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who can penetrate to the inside of its armor? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:14</span> Who can open the doors of its mouth? </p>
<p class="poetry">Its teeth all around are fearsome. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:15</span> Its back has rows of shields,</p>
<p class="poetry">shut up closely together as with a seal; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:16</span> each one is so close to the next </p>
<p class="poetry">that no air can come between them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:17</span> They lock tightly together, one to the next; </p>
<p class="poetry">they cling together and cannot be separated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:18</span> Its snorting throws out flashes of light;</p>
<p class="poetry">its eyes are like the red glow of dawn. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:19</span> Out of its mouth go flames, </p>
<p class="poetry">sparks of fire shoot forth!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:20</span> Smoke streams from its nostrils</p>
<p class="poetry">as from a boiling pot over burning rushes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:21</span> Its breath sets coals ablaze</p>
<p class="poetry">and a flame shoots from its mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:22</span> Strength lodges in its neck,</p>
<p class="poetry">and despair runs before it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:23</span> The folds of its flesh are tightly joined;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are firm on it, immovable. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:24</span> Its heart is hard as rock,</p>
<p class="poetry">hard as a lower millstone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:25</span> When it rises up, the mighty are terrified,</p>
<p class="poetry">at its thrashing about they withdraw. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:26</span> Whoever strikes it with a sword </p>
<p class="poetry">will have no effect, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor with the spear, arrow, or dart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:27</span> It regards iron as straw</p>
<p class="poetry">and bronze as rotten wood. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:28</span> Arrows do not make it flee;</p>
<p class="poetry">slingstones become like chaff to it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:29</span> A club is counted as a piece of straw;</p>
<p class="poetry">it laughs at the rattling of the lance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:30</span> Its underparts are the sharp points of potsherds,</p>
<p class="poetry">it leaves its mark in the mud </p>
<p class="poetry">like a threshing sledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:31</span> It makes the deep boil like a cauldron</p>
<p class="poetry">and stirs up the sea like a pot of ointment, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:32</span> It leaves a glistening wake behind it;</p>
<p class="poetry">one would think the deep had a head of white hair. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:33</span> The likes of it is not on earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">a creature without fear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">41:34</span> It looks on every haughty being;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is king over all that are proud.” </p>

</body>
</html>