<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to Bildad </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> Then Job answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:2</span> “Truly, I know that this is so.</p>
<p class="poetry">But how can a human be just before God? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:3</span> If someone wishes to contend with him,</p>
<p class="poetry">he cannot answer him one time in a thousand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:4</span> He is wise in heart and mighty in strength —</p>
<p class="poetry">who has resisted him and remained safe? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:5</span> He who removes mountains suddenly, </p>
<p class="poetry">who overturns them in his anger, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:6</span> he who shakes the earth out of its place </p>
<p class="poetry">so that its pillars tremble, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:7</span> he who commands the sun, and it does not shine </p>
<p class="poetry">and seals up the stars, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:8</span> he alone spreads out the heavens,</p>
<p class="poetry">and treads on the waves of the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:9</span> He makes the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the constellations of the southern sky; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:10</span> he does great and unsearchable things, </p>
<p class="poetry">and wonderful things without number. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:11</span> If he passes by me, I cannot see him, </p>
<p class="poetry">if he goes by, I cannot perceive him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:12</span> If he snatches away, who can turn him back? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who dares to say to him, ‘What are you doing?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:13</span> God does not restrain his anger; </p>
<p class="poetry">under him the helpers of Rahab lie crushed. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Impossibility of Facing God in Court</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:14</span> “How much less, then, can I answer him </p>
<p class="poetry">and choose my words to argue with him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:15</span> Although I am innocent, </p>
<p class="poetry">I could not answer him; </p>
<p class="poetry">I could only plead with my judge for mercy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:16</span> If I summoned him, and he answered me, </p>
<p class="poetry">I would not believe </p>
<p class="poetry">that he would be listening to my voice—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:17</span> he who crushes me with a tempest,</p>
<p class="poetry">and multiplies my wounds for no reason. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:18</span> He does not allow me to recover my breath,</p>
<p class="poetry">for he fills me with bitterness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:19</span> If it is a matter of strength, </p>
<p class="poetry">most certainly he is the strong one!</p>
<p class="poetry">And if it is a matter of justice, </p>
<p class="poetry">he will say, ‘Who will summon me?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:20</span> Although I am innocent, </p>
<p class="poetry">my mouth would condemn me, </p>
<p class="poetry">although I am blameless, </p>
<p class="poetry">it would declare me perverse. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:21</span> I am blameless. I do not know myself. </p>
<p class="poetry">I despise my life. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Accusation of God’s Justice</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:22</span> “It is all one! That is why I say, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘He destroys the blameless and the guilty.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:23</span> If a scourge brings sudden death, </p>
<p class="poetry">he mocks at the despair of the innocent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:24</span> If a land has been given </p>
<p class="poetry">into the hand of a wicked man, </p>
<p class="poetry">he covers the faces of its judges; </p>
<p class="poetry">if it is not he, then who is it? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Renewed Complaint</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:25</span> “My days are swifter than a runner, </p>
<p class="poetry">they speed by without seeing happiness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:26</span> They glide by like reed boats,</p>
<p class="poetry">like an eagle that swoops down on its prey. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:27</span> If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will change my expression and be cheerful,’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:28</span> I dread all my sufferings, </p>
<p class="poetry">for I know that you do not hold me blameless. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:29</span> If I am guilty, </p>
<p class="poetry">why then weary myself in vain? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:30</span> If I wash myself with snow-melt water, </p>
<p class="poetry">and make my hands clean with lye, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:31</span> then you plunge me into a slimy pit </p>
<p class="poetry">and my own clothes abhor me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:32</span> For he is not a human being like I am,</p>
<p class="poetry">that I might answer him,</p>
<p class="poetry">that we might come together in judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:33</span> Nor is there an arbiter between us,</p>
<p class="poetry">who might lay his hand on us both, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:34</span> who would take his rod away from me</p>
<p class="poetry">so that his terror would not make me afraid. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:35</span> Then would I speak and not fear him,</p>
<p class="poetry">but it is not so with me. </p>

</body>
</html>