<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 17</h2><p class="psasuper">A prayer of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:1</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, consider my just cause. </p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention to my cry for help.</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen to the prayer</p>
<p class="poetry">I sincerely offer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:2</span> Make a just decision on my behalf. </p>
<p class="poetry">Decide what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:3</span> You have scrutinized my inner motives; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have examined me during the night. </p>
<p class="poetry">You have carefully evaluated me, but you find no sin.</p>
<p class="poetry">I am determined I will say nothing sinful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:4</span> As for the actions of people —</p>
<p class="poetry">just as you have commanded,</p>
<p class="poetry">I have not followed in the footsteps of violent men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:5</span> I carefully obey your commands; </p>
<p class="poetry">I do not deviate from them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:6</span> I call to you because you will answer me, O God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen to me! </p>
<p class="poetry">Hear what I say! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:7</span> Accomplish awesome, faithful deeds, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who powerfully deliver those who look to you for protection from their enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:8</span> Protect me as you would protect the pupil of your eye. </p>
<p class="poetry">Hide me in the shadow of your wings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:9</span> Protect me from the wicked men who attack me,</p>
<p class="poetry">my enemies who crowd around me for the kill. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:10</span> They are calloused; </p>
<p class="poetry">they speak arrogantly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:11</span> They attack me, now they surround me; </p>
<p class="poetry">they intend to throw me to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:12</span> He is like a lion that wants to tear its prey to bits, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a young lion crouching in hidden places. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:13</span> Rise up, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">Confront him. Knock him down. </p>
<p class="poetry">Use your sword to rescue me from the wicked man. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:14</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, use your power to deliver me from these murderers, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the murderers of this world. </p>
<p class="poetry">They enjoy prosperity; </p>
<p class="poetry">you overwhelm them with the riches they desire. </p>
<p class="poetry">They have many children,</p>
<p class="poetry">and leave their wealth to their offspring. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:15</span> As for me, because I am innocent I will see your face; </p>
<p class="poetry">when I awake you will reveal yourself to me. </p>

</body>
</html>