<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 35</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 35</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu’s Third Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:1</span> Then Elihu answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:2</span> “Do you think this to be just</p>
<p class="poetry">when you say, ‘My right before God’? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:3</span> But you say, ‘What will it profit you,’ </p>
<p class="poetry">and, ‘What do I gain by not sinning?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:4</span> I will reply to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to your friends with you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:5</span> Gaze at the heavens and see;</p>
<p class="poetry">consider the clouds, which are higher than you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:6</span> If you sin, how does it affect God? </p>
<p class="poetry">If your transgressions are many,</p>
<p class="poetry">what does it do to him? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:7</span> If you are righteous, what do you give to God,</p>
<p class="poetry">or what does he receive from your hand? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:8</span> Your wickedness affects only a person like yourself,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your righteousness only other people. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">35:9</span> “People cry out </p>
<p class="poetry">because of the excess of oppression; </p>
<p class="poetry">they cry out for help</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the power of the mighty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:10</span> But no one says, ‘Where is God, my Creator,</p>
<p class="poetry">who gives songs in the night, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:11</span> who teaches us more than the wild animals of the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">and makes us wiser than the birds of the sky?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:12</span> Then they cry out—but he does not answer—</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the arrogance of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:13</span> Surely it is an empty cry —God does not hear it;</p>
<p class="poetry">the Almighty does not take notice of it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:14</span> How much less, then,</p>
<p class="poetry">when you say that you do not perceive him,</p>
<p class="poetry">that the case is before him </p>
<p class="poetry">and you are waiting for him! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:15</span> And further, when you say</p>
<p class="poetry">that his anger does not punish, </p>
<p class="poetry">and that he does not know transgression! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:16</span> So Job opens his mouth to no purpose; </p>
<p class="poetry">without knowledge he multiplies words.” </p>

</body>
</html>