<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 27</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Protest of Innocence</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:1</span> And Job took up his discourse again: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:2</span> “As surely as God lives, who has denied me justice, </p>
<p class="poetry">the Almighty, who has made my life bitter —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:3</span> for while my spirit is still in me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the breath from God is in my nostrils, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:4</span> my lips will not speak wickedness,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my tongue will whisper no deceit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:5</span> I will never declare that you three are in the right;</p>
<p class="poetry">until I die, I will not set aside my integrity! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:6</span> I will maintain my righteousness</p>
<p class="poetry">and never let it go;</p>
<p class="poetry">my conscience will not reproach me</p>
<p class="poetry">for as long as I live. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condition of the Wicked</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:7</span> “May my enemy be like the wicked, </p>
<p class="poetry">my adversary like the unrighteous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:8</span> For what hope does the godless have when he is cut off, </p>
<p class="poetry">when God takes away his life? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:9</span> Does God listen to his cry</p>
<p class="poetry">when distress overtakes him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:10</span> Will he find delight in the Almighty?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will he call out to God at all times? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:11</span> I will teach you about the power of God;</p>
<p class="poetry">what is on the Almighty’s mind I will not conceal. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:12</span> If you yourselves have all seen this,</p>
<p class="poetry">Why in the world do you continue this meaningless talk? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:13</span> This is the portion of the wicked man </p>
<p class="poetry">allotted by God, </p>
<p class="poetry">the inheritance that evildoers receive </p>
<p class="poetry">from the Almighty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:14</span> If his children increase—it is for the sword! </p>
<p class="poetry">His offspring never have enough to eat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:15</span> Those who survive him are buried by the plague, </p>
<p class="poetry">and their widows do not mourn for them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:16</span> If he piles up silver like dust</p>
<p class="poetry">and stores up clothing like mounds of clay, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:17</span> what he stores up a righteous man will wear,</p>
<p class="poetry">and an innocent man will inherit his silver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:18</span> The house he builds is as fragile as a moth’s cocoon, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a hut that a watchman has made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:19</span> He goes to bed wealthy, but will do so no more. </p>
<p class="poetry">When he opens his eyes, it is all gone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:20</span> Terrors overwhelm him like a flood; </p>
<p class="poetry">at night a whirlwind carries him off.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:21</span> The east wind carries him away, and he is gone;</p>
<p class="poetry">it sweeps him out of his place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:22</span> It hurls itself against him without pity </p>
<p class="poetry">as he flees headlong from its power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:23</span> It claps its hands at him in derision</p>
<p class="poetry">and hisses him away from his place. </p>

</body>
</html>