<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Evil Oppression on Earth</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:1</span> So I again considered all the oppression that continually occurs on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">This is what I saw: </p>
<p class="poetry">The oppressed were in tears, but no one was comforting them;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one delivers them from the power of their oppressors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> So I considered those who are dead and gone </p>
<p class="poetry">more fortunate than those who are still alive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> But better than both is the one who has not been born </p>
<p class="poetry">and has not seen the evil things that are done on earth. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Labor Motivated by Envy</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Then I considered all the skillful work that is done:</p>
<p class="poetry">Surely it is nothing more than competition between one person and another. </p>
<p class="poetry">This also is profitless—like chasing the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> The fool folds his hands and does no work, </p>
<p class="poetry">so he has nothing to eat but his own flesh. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:6</span> Better is one handful with some rest</p>
<p class="poetry">than two hands full of toil and chasing the wind. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Labor Motivated by Greed</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> So I again considered another futile thing on earth: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> A man who is all alone with no companion, </p>
<p class="poetry">he has no children nor siblings; </p>
<p class="poetry">yet there is no end to all his toil,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he is never satisfied with riches.</p>
<p class="poetry">He laments, “For whom am I toiling and depriving myself of pleasure?” </p>
<p class="poetry">This also is futile and a burdensome task! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Labor is Beneficial When Its Rewards Are Shared</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:9</span> Two people are better than one,</p>
<p class="poetry">because they can reap more benefit from their labor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:10</span> For if they fall, one will help his companion up,</p>
<p class="poetry">but pity the person who falls down and has no one to help him up. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Furthermore, if two lie down together, they can keep each other warm,</p>
<p class="poetry">but how can one person keep warm by himself?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> Although an assailant may overpower one person,</p>
<p class="poetry">two can withstand him.</p>
<p class="poetry">Moreover, a three-stranded cord is not quickly broken. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Labor Motivated by Prestige Seeking</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:13</span> A poor but wise youth is better than an old and foolish king</p>
<p class="poetry">who no longer knows how to receive advice.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:14</span> For he came out of prison to become king,</p>
<p class="poetry">even though he had been born poor in what would become his kingdom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:15</span> I considered all the living who walk on earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the successor who would arise in his place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:16</span> There is no end to all the people nor to the past generations, </p>
<p class="poetry">yet future generations will not rejoice in him.</p>
<p class="poetry">This also is profitless and like chasing the wind. </p>

</body>
</html>