<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 44</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 44</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Renew Israel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:1</span> “Now, listen, Jacob my servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel whom I have chosen!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:2</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the one who made you, says—</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who formed you in the womb and helps you:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Don’t be afraid, my servant Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">Jeshurun, whom I have chosen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:3</span> For I will pour water on the parched ground </p>
<p class="poetry">and cause streams to flow on the dry land.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will pour my Spirit on your offspring</p>
<p class="poetry">and my blessing on your children. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:4</span> They will sprout up like a tree in the grass, </p>
<p class="poetry">like poplars beside channels of water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:5</span> One will say, ‘I belong to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and another will use the name ‘Jacob.’</p>
<p class="poetry">One will write on his hand, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and use the name ‘Israel.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Absurdity of Idolatry</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:6</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, Israel’s king, says,</p>
<p class="poetry">their Protector, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I am the first and I am the last,</p>
<p class="poetry">there is no God but me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:7</span> Who is like me? Let him make his claim! </p>
<p class="poetry">Let him announce it and explain it to me—</p>
<p class="poetry">since I established an ancient people — </p>
<p class="poetry">let them announce future events. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:8</span> Don’t panic! Don’t be afraid! </p>
<p class="poetry">Did I not tell you beforehand and decree it?</p>
<p class="poetry">You are my witnesses! Is there any God but me?</p>
<p class="poetry">There is no other sheltering rock; I know of none.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:9</span> All who form idols are nothing;</p>
<p class="poetry">the things in which they delight are worthless.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their witnesses cannot see;</p>
<p class="poetry">they recognize nothing, so they are put to shame. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:10</span> Who forms a god and casts an idol</p>
<p class="poetry">that will prove worthless? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:11</span> Look, all his associates will be put to shame;</p>
<p class="poetry">the craftsmen are mere humans. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let them all assemble and take their stand.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will panic and be put to shame. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:12</span> A blacksmith works with his tool </p>
<p class="poetry">and forges metal over the coals.</p>
<p class="poetry">He forms it with hammers;</p>
<p class="poetry">he makes it with his strong arm.</p>
<p class="poetry">He gets hungry and loses his energy; </p>
<p class="poetry">he drinks no water and gets tired. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:13</span> A carpenter takes measurements; </p>
<p class="poetry">he marks out an outline of its form; </p>
<p class="poetry">he scrapes it with chisels,</p>
<p class="poetry">and marks it with a compass.</p>
<p class="poetry">He patterns it after the human form, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a well-built human being,</p>
<p class="poetry">and puts it in a shrine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:14</span> He cuts down cedars</p>
<p class="poetry">and acquires a cypress or an oak.</p>
<p class="poetry">He gets trees from the forest;</p>
<p class="poetry">he plants a cedar and the rain makes it grow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:15</span> A man uses it to make a fire; </p>
<p class="poetry">he takes some of it and warms himself.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, he kindles a fire and bakes bread.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then he makes a god and worships it;</p>
<p class="poetry">he makes an idol and bows down to it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:16</span> Half of it he burns in the fire—</p>
<p class="poetry">over that half he cooks meat;</p>
<p class="poetry">he roasts a meal and fills himself.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, he warms himself and says,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Ah! I am warm as I look at the fire.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:17</span> With the rest of it he makes a god, his idol;</p>
<p class="poetry">he bows down to it and worships it.</p>
<p class="poetry">He prays to it, saying,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Rescue me, for you are my god!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:18</span> They do not comprehend or understand,</p>
<p class="poetry">for their eyes are blind and cannot see;</p>
<p class="poetry">their minds do not discern. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:19</span> No one thinks to himself,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor do they comprehend or understand and say to themselves:</p>
<p class="poetry">‘I burned half of it in the fire—</p>
<p class="poetry">yes, I baked bread over the coals;</p>
<p class="poetry">I roasted meat and ate it.</p>
<p class="poetry">With the rest of it should I make a disgusting idol?</p>
<p class="poetry">Should I bow down to dry wood?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:20</span> He feeds on ashes; </p>
<p class="poetry">his deceived mind misleads him.</p>
<p class="poetry">He cannot rescue himself,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor does he say, ‘Is this not a false god I hold in my right hand?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:21</span> Remember these things, O Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">O Israel, for you are my servant.</p>
<p class="poetry">I formed you to be my servant;</p>
<p class="poetry">O Israel, I will not forget you! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:22</span> I remove the guilt of your rebellious deeds as if they were a cloud,</p>
<p class="poetry">the guilt of your sins as if they were a cloud. </p>
<p class="poetry">Come back to me, for I protect you.”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:23</span> Shout for joy, O sky, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> intervenes; </p>
<p class="poetry">shout out, you subterranean regions of the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">O mountains, give a joyful shout;</p>
<p class="poetry">you too, O forest and all your trees! </p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protects Jacob;</p>
<p class="poetry">he reveals his splendor through Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Empowers Cyrus</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:24</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, your Protector, says,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who formed you in the womb:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who made everything,</p>
<p class="poetry">who alone stretched out the sky,</p>
<p class="poetry">who fashioned the earth all by myself, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:25</span> who frustrates the omens of the empty talkers </p>
<p class="poetry">and humiliates the omen readers,</p>
<p class="poetry">who overturns the counsel of the wise men </p>
<p class="poetry">and makes their advice seem foolish, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:26</span> who fulfills the oracles of his prophetic servants </p>
<p class="poetry">and brings to pass the announcements of his messengers,</p>
<p class="poetry">who says about Jerusalem, ‘She will be inhabited,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and about the towns of Judah, ‘They will be rebuilt,</p>
<p class="poetry">her ruins I will raise up,’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:27</span> who says to the deep sea, ‘Be dry!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will dry up your sea currents,’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:28</span> who commissions Cyrus, the one I appointed as shepherd </p>
<p class="poetry">to carry out all my wishes </p>
<p class="poetry">and to decree concerning Jerusalem, ‘She will be rebuilt,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and concerning the temple, ‘It will be reconstructed.’ </p>

</body>
</html>