<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors dishonest scales, </p>
<p class="poetry">but an accurate weight is his delight.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:2</span> After pride came, disgrace followed; </p>
<p class="poetry">but wisdom came with humility. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:3</span> The integrity of the upright guides them, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the crookedness of the treacherous destroys them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:4</span> Wealth does not profit in the day of wrath, </p>
<p class="poetry">but righteousness delivers from death.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:5</span> The righteousness of the blameless will make their way smooth, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the wicked will fall through their own wickedness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:6</span> The righteousness of the upright will deliver them, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the treacherous will be ensnared by their own desires. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:7</span> When a wicked person dies, his expectation perishes, </p>
<p class="poetry">and hope based on power has perished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:8</span> A righteous person was delivered out of trouble,</p>
<p class="poetry">then a wicked person took his place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:9</span> With his speech the godless person destroys his neighbor,</p>
<p class="poetry">but by knowledge the righteous will be delivered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:10</span> When the righteous do well, the city rejoices; </p>
<p class="poetry">when the wicked perish, there is joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:11</span> A city is exalted by the blessing provided from the upright,</p>
<p class="poetry">but it is destroyed by the counsel of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:12</span> The one who denounces his neighbor lacks sense, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a discerning person keeps silent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:13</span> The one who goes about slandering others reveals secrets,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who is trustworthy conceals a matter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:14</span> When there is no guidance a nation falls,</p>
<p class="poetry">but there is success in the abundance of counselors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:15</span> The one who has put up security for a stranger will surely have trouble, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever avoids shaking hands is secure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:16</span> A generous woman gains honor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and ruthless men seize wealth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:17</span> A kind person benefits himself, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a cruel person brings himself trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:18</span> The wicked person earns deceitful wages, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who sows righteousness reaps a genuine reward. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:19</span> True righteousness leads to life,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who pursues evil pursues it to his own death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:20</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors those who are perverse in heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">but those who are blameless in their ways are his delight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:21</span> Be assured that the evil person will not be unpunished, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the descendants of the righteous have escaped harm. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:22</span> Like a gold ring in a pig’s snout</p>
<p class="poetry">is a beautiful woman who rejects discretion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:23</span> The desire of the righteous is only good,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the expectation of the wicked is wrath. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:24</span> One person is generous and yet grows more wealthy, </p>
<p class="poetry">but another withholds more than he should and comes to poverty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:25</span> A generous person will be enriched, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who provides water for others will himself be satisfied. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:26</span> People will curse the one who withholds grain, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they will praise the one who sells it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:27</span> The one who diligently seeks good seeks favor,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who searches for evil—it will come to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:28</span> The one who trusts in his riches will fall,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the righteous will flourish like a green leaf. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:29</span> The one who troubles his family will inherit nothing, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the fool will be a servant to the wise person. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:30</span> The fruit of the righteous is like a tree producing life, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who wins souls is wise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:31</span> If the righteous are recompensed on earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">how much more the wicked sinner! </p>

</body>
</html>