<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 46</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 46</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Carries His People</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:1</span> Bel kneels down,</p>
<p class="poetry">Nebo bends low. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their images weigh down animals and beasts. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your heavy images are burdensome to tired animals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:2</span> Together they bend low and kneel down;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are unable to rescue the images; </p>
<p class="poetry">they themselves head off into captivity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:3</span> “Listen to me, O family of Jacob, </p>
<p class="poetry">all you who are left from the family of Israel, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who have been carried from birth, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who have been supported from the time you left the womb. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:4</span> Even when you are old, I will take care of you, </p>
<p class="poetry">even when you have gray hair, I will carry you.</p>
<p class="poetry">I made you and I will support you;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will carry you and rescue you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:5</span> To whom can you compare and liken me?</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell me whom you think I resemble, so we can be compared! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:6</span> Those who empty out gold from a purse</p>
<p class="poetry">and weigh out silver on the scale </p>
<p class="poetry">hire a metalsmith, who makes it into a god.</p>
<p class="poetry">They then bow down and worship it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:7</span> They put it on their shoulder and carry it;</p>
<p class="poetry">they put it in its place and it just stands there;</p>
<p class="poetry">it does not move from its place.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even when someone cries out to it, it does not reply;</p>
<p class="poetry">it does not deliver him from his distress. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:8</span> Remember this, so you can be brave. </p>
<p class="poetry">Think about it, you rebels! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:9</span> Remember what I accomplished in antiquity. </p>
<p class="poetry">Truly I am God, I have no peer; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am God, and there is none like me,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:10</span> who announces the end from the beginning</p>
<p class="poetry">and reveals beforehand what has not yet occurred;</p>
<p class="poetry">who says, ‘My plan will be realized,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will accomplish what I desire;’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:11</span> who summons an eagle from the east,</p>
<p class="poetry">from a distant land, one who carries out my plan.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, I have decreed, </p>
<p class="poetry">yes, I will bring it to pass;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have formulated a plan,</p>
<p class="poetry">yes, I will carry it out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:12</span> Listen to me, you stubborn people, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who distance yourselves from doing what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">46:13</span> I am bringing my deliverance near, it is not far away;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am bringing my salvation near, it does not wait.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will save Zion; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will adorn Israel with my splendor. </p>

</body>
</html>