<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Superscription</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span>  This is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message that came to Hosea son of Beeri during the time of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and during the time of Jeroboam son of Joash, king of Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Symbols of Sin and Judgment: The Prostitute and Her Children</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:2</span> When the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> first spoke through Hosea, he said to him, “Go marry a prostitute who will bear illegitimate children conceived through prostitution, because the nation continually commits spiritual prostitution by turning away from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.” <span class="verse">1:3</span> So Hosea married Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim. Then she conceived and gave birth to a son for him. <span class="verse">1:4</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Hosea, “Name him ‘Jezreel,’ because in a little while I will punish the dynasty of Jehu on account of the bloodshed in the valley of Jezreel, and I will put an end to the kingdom of Israel. <span class="verse">1:5</span> At that time, I will destroy the military power of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:6</span> She conceived again and gave birth to a daughter. Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to him, “Name her ‘No Pity’ (Lo-Ruhamah) because I will no longer have pity on the nation of Israel. For I will certainly not forgive their guilt. <span class="verse">1:7</span> But I will have pity on the nation of Judah. I will deliver them by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God; I will not deliver them by the warrior’s bow, by sword, by military victory, by chariot horses, or by chariots.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:8</span> When she had weaned “No Pity” (Lo-Ruhamah), she conceived again and gave birth to another son. <span class="verse">1:9</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said: “Name him ‘Not My People’ (Lo-Ammi), because you are not my people and I am not your God.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Restoration of Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:10</span> (2:1) However, in the future the number of the people of Israel will be like the sand of the sea that can be neither measured nor numbered. Although it was said to them, “You are not my people,” it will be said to them, “You are children of the living God!” <span class="verse">1:11</span> Then the people of Judah and the people of Israel will be gathered together. They will appoint for themselves one leader, and will flourish in the land. Certainly, the day of Jezreel will be great! </p>

</body>
</html>