<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Execution of Idolaters</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> Then he shouted in my ears, “Approach, you who are to visit destruction on the city, each with his destructive weapon in his hand!” <span class="verse">9:2</span> Next I noticed six men coming from the direction of the upper gate that faces north, each with his war club in his hand. Among them was a man dressed in linen with a writing kit at his side. They came and stood beside the bronze altar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:3</span> Then the glory of the God of Israel went up from the cherub where it had rested to the threshold of the temple. He called to the man dressed in linen who had the writing kit at his side. <span class="verse">9:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to him, “Go through the city of Jerusalem and put a mark on the foreheads of the people who moan and groan over all the abominations practiced in it.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:5</span> While I listened, he said to the others, “Go through the city after him and strike people down; do not let your eye pity nor spare anyone! <span class="verse">9:6</span> Old men, young men, young women, little children, and women—wipe them out! But do not touch anyone who has the mark. Begin at my sanctuary!” So they began with the elders who were at the front of the temple. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:7</span> He said to them, “Defile the temple and fill the courtyards with corpses. Go!” So they went out and struck people down throughout the city. <span class="verse">9:8</span> While they were striking them down, I was left alone, and I threw myself face down and cried out, “Ah, Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! Will you destroy the entire remnant of Israel when you pour out your fury on Jerusalem?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:9</span> He said to me, “The sin of the house of Israel and Judah is extremely great; the land is full of murder, and the city is full of corruption, for they say, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has abandoned the land, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does not see!’ <span class="verse">9:10</span> But as for me, my eye will not pity them nor will I spare them; I hereby repay them for what they have done.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:11</span> Next I noticed the man dressed in linen with the writing kit at his side bringing back word: “I have done just as you commanded me.”</p>

</body>
</html>