<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Samuel 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Samuel<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Establishes a Covenant with David</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> The king settled into his palace, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> gave him relief from all his enemies on all sides. <span class="verse">7:2</span> The king said to Nathan the prophet, “Look! I am living in a palace made from cedar, while the ark of God sits in the middle of a tent.” <span class="verse">7:3</span> Nathan replied to the king, “You should go and do whatever you have in mind, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is with you.” <span class="verse">7:4</span> That night the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to Nathan, <span class="verse">7:5</span> “Go, tell my servant David, ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said: Do you really intend to build a house for me to live in? <span class="verse">7:6</span> I have not lived in a house from the time I brought the Israelites up from Egypt to the present day. Instead, I was traveling with them and living in a tent. <span class="verse">7:7</span> Wherever I moved among all the Israelites, I did not say to any of their leaders whom I appointed to care for my people Israel, “Why have you not built me a house made from cedar?”’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:8</span> “So now, say this to my servant David, ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has said: I took you from the pasture and from your work as a shepherd to make you leader of my people Israel. <span class="verse">7:9</span> I was with you wherever you went, and I defeated all your enemies before you. Now I will make you as famous as the great men of the earth. <span class="verse">7:10</span> I will establish a place for my people Israel and settle them there; they will live there and not be disturbed anymore. Violent men will not oppress them again, as they did in the beginning<sup></sup> <span class="verse">7:11</span> and during the time when I appointed judges to lead my people Israel. Instead, I will give you relief from all your enemies. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> declares to you that he himself will build a dynastic house for you. <span class="verse">7:12</span> When the time comes for you to die, I will raise up your descendant, one of your own sons, to succeed you, and I will establish his kingdom. <span class="verse">7:13</span> He will build a house for my name, and I will make his dynasty permanent. <span class="verse">7:14</span> I will become his father and he will become my son. When he sins, I will correct him with the rod of men and with wounds inflicted by human beings. <span class="verse">7:15</span> But my loyal love will not be removed from him as I removed it from Saul, whom I removed from before you. <span class="verse">7:16</span> Your house and your kingdom will stand before me permanently; your dynasty will be permanent.’” <span class="verse">7:17</span> Nathan told David all these words that were revealed to him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Offers a Prayer to God</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:18</span> King David went in, sat before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and said, “Who am I, O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and what is my family, that you should have brought me to this point? <span class="verse">7:19</span> And you didn’t stop there, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God! You have also spoken about the future of your servant’s family. Is this your usual way of dealing with men, O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>? <span class="verse">7:20</span> What more can David say to you? You have given your servant special recognition, O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! <span class="verse">7:21</span> For the sake of your promise and according to your purpose you have done this great thing in order to reveal it to your servant. <span class="verse">7:22</span> Therefore you are great, O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for there is none like you. There is no God besides you! What we have heard is true. <span class="verse">7:23</span> Who is like your people, Israel, a unique nation on the earth? Their God went to claim a nation for himself and to make a name for himself! You did great and awesome acts for your land, before your people whom you delivered for yourself from the Egyptian empire and its gods. <span class="verse">7:24</span> You made Israel your very own people for all time. You, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, became their God. <span class="verse">7:25</span> So now, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God, make this promise you have made about your servant and his family a permanent reality. Do as you promised, <span class="verse">7:26</span> so you may gain lasting fame, as people say, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies is God over Israel!’ The dynasty of your servant David will be established before you, <span class="verse">7:27</span> for you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel, have told your servant, ‘I will build you a dynastic house.’ That is why your servant has had the courage to pray this prayer to you. <span class="verse">7:28</span> Now, O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you are the true God. May your words prove to be true! You have made this good promise to your servant. <span class="verse">7:29</span> Now be willing to bless your servant’s dynasty so that it may stand permanently before you, for you, O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have spoken. By your blessing may your servant’s dynasty be blessed from now on into the future!” </p>

</body>
</html>