<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Titus 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Titus<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conduct Consistent with Sound Teaching</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> But as for you, communicate the behavior that goes with sound teaching. <span class="verse">2:2</span> Older men are to be temperate, dignified, self-controlled, sound in faith, in love, and in endurance. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Older women likewise are to exhibit behavior fitting for those who are holy, not slandering, not slaves to excessive drinking, but teaching what is good. <span class="verse">2:4</span> In this way they will train the younger women to love their husbands, to love their children, <span class="verse">2:5</span> to be self-controlled, pure, fulfilling their duties at home, kind, being subject to their own husbands, so that the message of God may not be discredited. <span class="verse">2:6</span> Encourage younger men likewise to be self-controlled, <span class="verse">2:7</span> showing yourself to be an example of good works in every way. In your teaching show integrity, dignity, <span class="verse">2:8</span> and a sound message that cannot be criticized, so that any opponent will be at a loss, because he has nothing evil to say about us. <span class="verse">2:9</span> Slaves are to be subject to their own masters in everything, to do what is wanted and not talk back, <span class="verse">2:10</span> not pilfering, but showing all good faith, in order to bring credit to the teaching of God our Savior in everything. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all people. <span class="verse">2:12</span> It trains us to reject godless ways and worldly desires and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives in the present age, <span class="verse">2:13</span> as we wait for the happy fulfillment of our hope in the glorious appearing of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">2:14</span> He gave himself for us to set us free from every kind of lawlessness and to purify for himself a people who are truly his, who are eager to do good. <span class="verse">2:15</span> So communicate these things with the sort of exhortation or rebuke that carries full authority. Don’t let anyone look down on you. </p>

</body>
</html>