<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Beloved’s Wish Song</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Oh, how I wish you were my little brother, </p>
<p class="poetry">nursing at my mother’s breasts;</p>
<p class="poetry">if I saw you outside, I could kiss you—</p>
<p class="poetry">surely no one would despise me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:2</span> I would lead you and bring you to my mother’s house,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who taught me. </p>
<p class="poetry">I would give you spiced wine to drink, </p>
<p class="poetry">the nectar of my pomegranates. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Double Refrain: Embracing and Adjuration</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:3</span> His left hand is under my head,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his right hand embraces me. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to the Maidens:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:4</span> I admonish you, O maidens of Jerusalem:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Do not arouse or awaken love until it pleases!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Awakening of Love</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Maidens about His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:5</span> Who is this coming up from the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">leaning on her beloved?</p>
<p class="sosspeaker"><b><i>The Beloved to Her Lover:</i></b></p><p class="poetry">Under the apple tree I aroused you; </p>
<p class="poetry">there your mother conceived you,</p>
<p class="poetry">there she who bore you was in labor of childbirth. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Nature of True Love</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:6</span> Set me like a cylinder seal over your heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a signet on your arm. </p>
<p class="poetry">For love is as strong as death, </p>
<p class="poetry">passion is as unrelenting as Sheol.</p>
<p class="poetry">Its flames burst forth, </p>
<p class="poetry">it is a blazing flame. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:7</span> Surging waters cannot quench love;</p>
<p class="poetry">floodwaters cannot overflow it.</p>
<p class="poetry">If someone were to offer all his possessions to buy love, </p>
<p class="poetry">the offer would be utterly despised. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Brother’s Plan and the Sister’s Reward</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved’s Brothers:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:8</span> We have a little sister,</p>
<p class="poetry">and as yet she has no breasts.</p>
<p class="poetry">What shall we do for our sister</p>
<p class="poetry">on the day when she is spoken for? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> If she is a wall, </p>
<p class="poetry">we will build on her a battlement of silver;</p>
<p class="poetry">but if she is a door,</p>
<p class="poetry">we will barricade her with boards of cedar. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> I was a wall,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my breasts were like fortress towers. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then I found favor in his eyes. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Solomon’s Vineyard and the Beloved’s Vineyard</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:11</span> Solomon had a vineyard at Baal Hamon;</p>
<p class="poetry">he leased out the vineyard to those who maintained it.</p>
<p class="poetry">Each was to bring 1,000 shekels of silver for its fruit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> My vineyard, which belongs to me, is at my disposal alone. </p>
<p class="poetry">The thousand shekels belong to you, O Solomon,</p>
<p class="poetry">and 200 shekels belong to those who maintain it for its fruit. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Epilogue: The Lover’s Request and His Beloved’s Invitation</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:13</span> O you who stay in the gardens,</p>
<p class="poetry">my companions are listening attentively for your voice;</p>
<p class="poetry">let me be the one to hear it! </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Make haste, my beloved!</p>
<p class="poetry">Be like a gazelle or a young stag</p>
<p class="poetry">on the mountains of spices. </p>

</body>
</html>