<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 8</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>gittith</i> style; a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our Lord, </p>
<p class="poetry">how magnificent is your reputation throughout the earth!</p>
<p class="poetry">You reveal your majesty in the heavens above. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:2</span> From the mouths of children and nursing babies</p>
<p class="poetry">you have ordained praise on account of your adversaries, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that you might put an end to the vindictive enemy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:3</span> When I look up at the heavens, which your fingers made,</p>
<p class="poetry">and see the moon and the stars, which you set in place, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:4</span> Of what importance is the human race, that you should notice them?</p>
<p class="poetry">Of what importance is mankind, that you should pay attention to them? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:5</span> You made them a little less than the heavenly beings. </p>
<p class="poetry">You crowned mankind with honor and majesty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:6</span> you appoint them to rule over your creation; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have placed everything under their authority, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:7</span> including all the sheep and cattle,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the wild animals, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:8</span> the birds in the sky, the fish in the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">and everything that moves through the currents of the seas. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our Lord, </p>
<p class="poetry">how magnificent is your reputation throughout the earth! </p>

</body>
</html>