<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 27</h2><p class="psasuper">By David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is my light and my salvation.</p>
<p class="poetry">I fear no one. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protects my life.</p>
<p class="poetry">I am afraid of no one. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:2</span> When evil men attack me </p>
<p class="poetry">to devour my flesh, </p>
<p class="poetry">when my adversaries and enemies attack me, </p>
<p class="poetry">they stumble and fall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:3</span> Even when an army is deployed against me,</p>
<p class="poetry">I do not fear. </p>
<p class="poetry">Even when war is imminent, </p>
<p class="poetry">I remain confident. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:4</span> I have asked the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for one thing—</p>
<p class="poetry">this is what I desire!</p>
<p class="poetry">I want to live in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s house all the days of my life,</p>
<p class="poetry">so I can gaze at the splendor of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">and contemplate in his temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:5</span> He will surely give me shelter in the day of danger; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will hide me in his home. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will place me on an inaccessible rocky summit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:6</span> Now I will triumph</p>
<p class="poetry">over my enemies who surround me. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will offer sacrifices in his dwelling place and shout for joy. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:7</span> Hear me, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, when I cry out.</p>
<p class="poetry">Have mercy on me and answer me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:8</span> My heart tells me to pray to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I do pray to you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:9</span> Do not reject me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not push your servant away in anger.</p>
<p class="poetry">You are my deliverer. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not forsake or abandon me,</p>
<p class="poetry">O God who vindicates me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:10</span> Even if my father and mother abandoned me, </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> would take me in. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:11</span> Teach me how you want me to live, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; </p>
<p class="poetry">lead me along a level path because of those who wait to ambush me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:12</span> Do not turn me over to my enemies, </p>
<p class="poetry">for false witnesses who want to destroy me testify against me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:13</span> Where would I be if I did not believe I would experience</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s favor in the land of the living? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:14</span> Rely on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">Be strong and confident! </p>
<p class="poetry">Rely on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>

</body>
</html>