<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 63</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 63</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Victorious Divine Warrior</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:1</span> Who is this who comes from Edom, </p>
<p class="poetry">dressed in bright red, coming from Bozrah? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who is this one wearing royal attire, </p>
<p class="poetry">who marches confidently because of his great strength?</p>
<p class="poetry">“It is I, the one who announces vindication,</p>
<p class="poetry">and who is able to deliver!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:2</span> Why are your clothes red?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you look like someone who has stomped on grapes in a vat? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:3</span> “I have stomped grapes in the winepress all by myself;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one from the nations joined me.</p>
<p class="poetry">I stomped on them in my anger;</p>
<p class="poetry">I trampled them down in my rage.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their juice splashed on my garments,</p>
<p class="poetry">and stained all my clothes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:4</span> For I looked forward to the day of vengeance,</p>
<p class="poetry">and then payback time arrived. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:5</span> I looked, but there was no one to help;</p>
<p class="poetry">I was shocked because there was no one offering support. </p>
<p class="poetry">So my right arm accomplished deliverance;</p>
<p class="poetry">my raging anger drove me on. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:6</span> I trampled nations in my anger;</p>
<p class="poetry">I made them drunk in my rage;</p>
<p class="poetry">I splashed their blood on the ground.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prayer for Divine Intervention</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:7</span> I will tell of the faithful acts of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s praiseworthy deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will tell about all the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> did for us,</p>
<p class="poetry">the many good things he did for the family of Israel, </p>
<p class="poetry">because of his compassion and great faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:8</span> He said, “Certainly they will be my people,</p>
<p class="poetry">children who are not disloyal.” </p>
<p class="poetry">He became their deliverer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:9</span> Through all that they suffered, he suffered too. </p>
<p class="poetry">The messenger sent from his very presence delivered them.</p>
<p class="poetry">In his love and mercy he protected them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he lifted them up and carried them throughout ancient times. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:10</span> But they rebelled and offended his holy Spirit, </p>
<p class="poetry">so he turned into an enemy</p>
<p class="poetry">and fought against them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:11</span> His people remembered the ancient times. </p>
<p class="poetry">Where is the one who brought them up out of the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">along with the shepherd of his flock?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where is the one who placed his holy Spirit among them, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:12</span> the one who made his majestic power available to Moses, </p>
<p class="poetry">who divided the water before them,</p>
<p class="poetry">gaining for himself a lasting reputation, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:13</span> who led them through the deep water?</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a horse running through the wilderness they did not stumble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:14</span> As an animal that goes down into a valley to graze, </p>
<p class="poetry">so the Spirit of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> granted them rest.</p>
<p class="poetry">In this way you guided your people,</p>
<p class="poetry">gaining for yourself an honored reputation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:15</span> Look down from heaven and take notice,</p>
<p class="poetry">from your holy, majestic palace!</p>
<p class="poetry">Where are your zeal and power?</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not hold back your tender compassion! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:16</span> For you are our father,</p>
<p class="poetry">though Abraham does not know us</p>
<p class="poetry">and Israel does not recognize us.</p>
<p class="poetry">You, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, are our father;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have been called our Protector from ancient times. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:17</span> Why, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do you make us stray from your ways, </p>
<p class="poetry">and make our minds stubborn so that we do not obey you? </p>
<p class="poetry">Return for the sake of your servants,</p>
<p class="poetry">the tribes of your inheritance! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:18</span> For a short time your special nation possessed a land, </p>
<p class="poetry">but then our adversaries knocked down your holy sanctuary. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">63:19</span> We existed from ancient times, </p>
<p class="poetry">but you did not rule over them;</p>
<p class="poetry">they were not your subjects. </p>

</body>
</html>