<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Judges 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Judges<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Celebrating the Victory in Song</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> On that day Deborah and Barak son of Abinoam sang this victory song: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> “When the leaders took the lead in Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">When the people answered the call to war—</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> Hear, O kings!</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention, O rulers!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:4</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, when you departed from Seir,</p>
<p class="poetry">when you marched from Edom’s plains,</p>
<p class="poetry">the earth shook, the heavens poured down,</p>
<p class="poetry">the clouds poured down rain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> The mountains trembled before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of Sinai; </p>
<p class="poetry">before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:6</span> In the days of Shamgar son of Anath,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the days of Jael caravans disappeared; </p>
<p class="poetry">travelers had to go on winding side roads. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> Warriors were scarce; </p>
<p class="poetry">they were scarce in Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">until you arose, Deborah,</p>
<p class="poetry">until you arose as a motherly protector in Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> God chose new leaders, </p>
<p class="poetry">then fighters appeared in the city gates; </p>
<p class="poetry">but, I swear, not a shield or spear could be found </p>
<p class="poetry">among forty military units in Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> My heart went out to Israel’s leaders,</p>
<p class="poetry">to the people who answered the call to war. </p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:10</span> You who ride on light-colored female donkeys,</p>
<p class="poetry">who sit on saddle blankets, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who walk on the road, pay attention! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> Hear the sound of those who divide the sheep among the watering places;</p>
<p class="poetry">there they tell of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s victorious deeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">the victorious deeds of his warriors in Israel.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s people went down to the city gates—</p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:12</span> Wake up, wake up, Deborah!</p>
<p class="poetry">Wake up, wake up, sing a song!</p>
<p class="poetry">Get up, Barak!</p>
<p class="poetry">Capture your prisoners of war, son of Abinoam! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> Then the survivors came down to the mighty ones; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s people came down to me as warriors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:14</span> They came from Ephraim, who uprooted Amalek; </p>
<p class="poetry">they follow after you, Benjamin, with your soldiers.</p>
<p class="poetry">From Makir leaders came down,</p>
<p class="poetry">from Zebulun came the ones who march carrying an officer’s staff. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> Issachar’s leaders were with Deborah;</p>
<p class="poetry">the men of Issachar supported Barak;</p>
<p class="poetry">into the valley they were sent under Barak’s command. </p>
<p class="poetry">Among the clans of Reuben there was intense heart searching. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:16</span> Why do you remain among the sheepfolds, </p>
<p class="poetry">listening to the shepherds playing their pipes for their flocks? </p>
<p class="poetry">As for the clans of Reuben—there was intense searching of heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:17</span> Gilead stayed put beyond the Jordan River.</p>
<p class="poetry">As for Dan—why did he seek temporary employment in the shipyards? </p>
<p class="poetry">Asher remained on the seacoast;</p>
<p class="poetry">he stayed by his harbors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:18</span> The men of Zebulun were not concerned about their lives; </p>
<p class="poetry">Naphtali charged onto the battlefields. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:19</span> Kings came, they fought;</p>
<p class="poetry">the kings of Canaan fought</p>
<p class="poetry">at Taanach by the waters of Megiddo, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they took no silver as plunder.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:20</span> From the sky the stars fought,</p>
<p class="poetry">from their paths in the heavens they fought against Sisera. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:21</span> The Kishon River carried them off;</p>
<p class="poetry">the river confronted them —the Kishon River.</p>
<p class="poetry">Step on the necks of the strong! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:22</span> The horses’ hooves pounded the ground; </p>
<p class="poetry">the stallions galloped madly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:23</span> ‘Call judgment down on Meroz,’ says the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Be sure to call judgment down on those who live there,</p>
<p class="poetry">because they did not come to help in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s battle, </p>
<p class="poetry">to help in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s battle against the warriors.’ </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:24</span> The most rewarded of women should be Jael,</p>
<p class="poetry">the wife of Heber the Kenite!</p>
<p class="poetry">She should be the most rewarded of women who live in tents. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:25</span> He asked for water,</p>
<p class="poetry">and she gave him milk;</p>
<p class="poetry">in a bowl fit for a king, </p>
<p class="poetry">she served him curds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:26</span> Her left hand reached for the tent peg,</p>
<p class="poetry">her right hand for the workmen’s hammer.</p>
<p class="poetry">She “hammered” Sisera,</p>
<p class="poetry">she shattered his skull, </p>
<p class="poetry">she smashed his head, </p>
<p class="poetry">she drove the tent peg through his temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:27</span> Between her feet he collapsed,</p>
<p class="poetry">he fell limp and was lifeless; </p>
<p class="poetry">between her feet he collapsed and fell,<sup></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">in the spot where he collapsed,</p>
<p class="poetry">there he fell—violently killed! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:28</span> Through the window she looked;</p>
<p class="poetry">Sisera’s mother cried out through the lattice:</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Why is his chariot so slow to return?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why are the hoofbeats of his chariot horses delayed?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:29</span> The wisest of her ladies answer;</p>
<p class="poetry">indeed she even thinks to herself,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:30</span> ‘No doubt they are gathering and dividing the plunder —</p>
<p class="poetry">a girl or two for each man to rape! </p>
<p class="poetry">Sisera is grabbing up colorful cloth, </p>
<p class="poetry">he is grabbing up colorful embroidered cloth, </p>
<p class="poetry">two pieces of colorful embroidered cloth,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the neck of the plunderer!’ </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:31</span> May all your enemies perish like this, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">But may those who love you shine</p>
<p class="poetry">like the rising sun at its brightest.” </p>
<p class="bodytext">And the land had rest for forty years. </p>

</body>
</html>