<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 5</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, to be accompanied by wind instruments; a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Listen to what I say, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">Carefully consider my complaint! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> Pay attention to my cry for help,</p>
<p class="poetry">my King and my God,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I am praying to you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, in the morning you will hear me; </p>
<p class="poetry">in the morning I will present my case to you and then wait expectantly for an answer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> Certainly you are not a God who approves of evil; </p>
<p class="poetry">evil people cannot dwell with you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> Arrogant people cannot stand in your presence; </p>
<p class="poetry">you hate all who behave wickedly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> You destroy liars; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> despises violent and deceitful people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> But as for me, because of your great faithfulness I will enter your house; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will bow down toward your holy temple as I worship you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, lead me in your righteousness </p>
<p class="poetry">because of those who wait to ambush me, </p>
<p class="poetry">remove the obstacles in the way in which you are guiding me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> For they do not speak the truth; </p>
<p class="poetry">their stomachs are like the place of destruction, </p>
<p class="poetry">their throats like an open grave, </p>
<p class="poetry">their tongues like a steep slope leading into it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> Condemn them, O God!</p>
<p class="poetry">May their own schemes be their downfall. </p>
<p class="poetry">Drive them away because of their many acts of insurrection, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they have rebelled against you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> But may all who take shelter in you be happy. </p>
<p class="poetry">May they continually shout for joy. </p>
<p class="poetry">Shelter them so that those who are loyal to you may rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> Certainly you reward the godly, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a shield you protect them in your good favor. </p>

</body>
</html>