<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 27</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:1</span> Do not boast about tomorrow; </p>
<p class="poetry">for you do not know what a day may bring forth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:2</span> Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; </p>
<p class="poetry">someone else, and not your own lips. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:3</span> A stone is heavy and sand is weighty,</p>
<p class="poetry">but vexation by a fool is more burdensome than the two of them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:4</span> Wrath is cruel and anger is overwhelming, </p>
<p class="poetry">but who can stand before jealousy? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:5</span> Better is open rebuke</p>
<p class="poetry">than hidden love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:6</span> Faithful are the wounds of a friend,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the kisses of an enemy are excessive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:7</span> The one whose appetite is satisfied loathes honey,</p>
<p class="poetry">but to the hungry mouth every bitter thing is sweet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:8</span> Like a bird that wanders from its nest,</p>
<p class="poetry">so is a person who wanders from his home. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:9</span> Ointment and incense make the heart rejoice, </p>
<p class="poetry">likewise the sweetness of one’s friend from sincere counsel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:10</span> Do not forsake your friend and your father’s friend,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not enter your brother’s house in the day of your disaster;</p>
<p class="poetry">a neighbor nearby is better than a brother far away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:11</span> Be wise, my son, and make my heart glad,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that I may answer anyone who taunts me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:12</span> A shrewd person saw danger—he hid himself;</p>
<p class="poetry">the naive passed right on by — they had to pay for it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:13</span> Take a man’s garment when he has given security for a stranger,</p>
<p class="poetry">and hold him in pledge on behalf of a stranger. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:14</span> If someone blesses his neighbor with a loud voice early in the morning, </p>
<p class="poetry">it will be counted as a curse to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:15</span> A continual dripping on a rainy day—</p>
<p class="poetry">a contentious wife makes herself like that. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:16</span> Whoever contains her has contained the wind </p>
<p class="poetry">or can grasp oil with his right hand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:17</span> As iron sharpens iron,</p>
<p class="poetry">so a person sharpens his friend. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:18</span> The one who tends a fig tree will eat its fruit, </p>
<p class="poetry">and whoever takes care of his master will be honored. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:19</span> As in water the face is reflected as a face, </p>
<p class="poetry">so a person’s heart reflects the person. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:20</span> As Death and Destruction are never satisfied, </p>
<p class="poetry">so the eyes of a person are never satisfied. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:21</span> As the crucible is for silver and the furnace is for gold, </p>
<p class="poetry">so a person must put his praise to the test.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:22</span> If you should pound the fool in the mortar</p>
<p class="poetry">among the grain with the pestle,</p>
<p class="poetry">his foolishness would not depart from him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:23</span> Pay careful attention to the condition of your flocks, </p>
<p class="poetry">set your mind on your herds, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:24</span> for riches do not last forever,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor does a crown last from generation to generation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:25</span> When the hay is removed and new grass appears,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the grass from the hills is gathered in,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:26</span> the lambs will be for your clothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the goats will be for the price of a field. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:27</span> And there will be enough goat’s milk for your food, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the food of your household,</p>
<p class="poetry">and for the sustenance of your servant girls. </p>

</body>
</html>