<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 59</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 59</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>al-tashcheth</i> style; a prayer of David, written when Saul sent men to surround his house and murder him. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:1</span> Deliver me from my enemies, my God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Protect me from those who attack me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:2</span> Deliver me from evildoers. </p>
<p class="poetry">Rescue me from violent men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:3</span> For look, they wait to ambush me; </p>
<p class="poetry">powerful men stalk me,</p>
<p class="poetry">but not because I have rebelled or sinned, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:4</span> Though I have done nothing wrong, they are anxious to attack. </p>
<p class="poetry">Spring into action and help me. Take notice of me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:5</span> You, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">rouse yourself and punish all the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Have no mercy on any treacherous evildoers. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:6</span> They return in the evening;</p>
<p class="poetry">they growl like dogs</p>
<p class="poetry">and prowl around outside the city. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:7</span> Look, they hurl insults at me</p>
<p class="poetry">and openly threaten to kill me, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they say, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Who hears?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:8</span> But you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, laugh in disgust at them; </p>
<p class="poetry">you taunt all the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:9</span> You are my source of strength. I will wait for you. </p>
<p class="poetry">For God is my refuge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:10</span> The God who loves me will help me; </p>
<p class="poetry">God will enable me to triumph over my enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:11</span> Do not strike them dead suddenly,</p>
<p class="poetry">because then my people might forget the lesson. </p>
<p class="poetry">Use your power to make them homeless vagabonds and then bring them down,</p>
<p class="poetry">O Lord who shields us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:12</span> They speak sinful words. </p>
<p class="poetry">So let them be trapped by their own pride</p>
<p class="poetry">and by the curses and lies they speak. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:13</span> Angrily wipe them out. Wipe them out so they vanish.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let them know that God rules</p>
<p class="poetry">over Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:14</span> They return in the evening;</p>
<p class="poetry">they growl like dogs</p>
<p class="poetry">and prowl around outside the city. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:15</span> They wander around looking for something to eat;</p>
<p class="poetry">they refuse to sleep until they are full. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:16</span> As for me, I will sing about your strength;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will praise your loyal love in the morning.</p>
<p class="poetry">For you are my refuge </p>
<p class="poetry">and my place of shelter when I face trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">59:17</span> You are my source of strength. I will sing praises to you. </p>
<p class="poetry">For God is my refuge, the God who loves me. </p>

</body>
</html>