<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Zophar’s Second Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:1</span> Then Zophar the Naamathite answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:2</span> “This is why my troubled thoughts bring me back —</p>
<p class="poetry">because of my feelings within me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:3</span> When I hear a reproof that dishonors me,</p>
<p class="poetry">then my understanding prompts me to answer. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">20:4</span> “Surely you know that it has been from old,</p>
<p class="poetry">ever since humankind was placed on the earth, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:5</span> that the elation of the wicked is brief, </p>
<p class="poetry">the joy of the godless lasts but a moment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:6</span> Even though his stature reaches to the heavens</p>
<p class="poetry">and his head touches the clouds, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:7</span> he will perish forever, like his own excrement; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who used to see him will say, ‘Where is he?’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:8</span> Like a dream he flies away, never again to be found, </p>
<p class="poetry">and like a vision of the night he is put to flight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:9</span> People who had seen him will not see him again,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the place where he was </p>
<p class="poetry">will recognize him no longer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:10</span> His sons must recompense the poor;</p>
<p class="poetry">his own hands must return his wealth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:11</span> His bones were full of his youthful vigor, </p>
<p class="poetry">but that vigor will lie down with him in the dust. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">20:12</span> “If evil is sweet in his mouth</p>
<p class="poetry">and he hides it under his tongue, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:13</span> if he retains it for himself</p>
<p class="poetry">and does not let it go,</p>
<p class="poetry">and holds it fast in his mouth, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:14</span> his food is turned sour in his stomach; </p>
<p class="poetry">it becomes the venom of serpents within him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:15</span> The wealth that he consumed he vomits up,</p>
<p class="poetry">God will make him throw it out of his stomach. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:16</span> He sucks the poison of serpents; </p>
<p class="poetry">the fangs of a viper kill him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:17</span> He will not look on the streams, </p>
<p class="poetry">the rivers that are the torrents </p>
<p class="poetry">of honey and butter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:18</span> He gives back the ill-gotten gain </p>
<p class="poetry">without assimilating it; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will not enjoy the wealth from his commerce. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:19</span> For he has oppressed the poor and abandoned them; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has seized a house which he did not build. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:20</span> For he knows no satisfaction in his appetite; </p>
<p class="poetry">he does not let anything he desires escape. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:21</span> “Nothing is left for him to devour; </p>
<p class="poetry">that is why his prosperity does not last. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:22</span> In the fullness of his sufficiency, </p>
<p class="poetry">distress overtakes him.</p>
<p class="poetry">The full force of misery will come upon him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:23</span> “While he is filling his belly,</p>
<p class="poetry">God sends his burning anger against him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and rains down his blows upon him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:24</span> If he flees from an iron weapon,</p>
<p class="poetry">then an arrow from a bronze bow pierces him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:25</span> When he pulls it out and it comes out of his back,</p>
<p class="poetry">the gleaming point out of his liver,</p>
<p class="poetry">terrors come over him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:26</span> Total darkness waits to receive his treasures; </p>
<p class="poetry">a fire that has not been kindled </p>
<p class="poetry">will consume him and devour what is left in his tent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:27</span> The heavens reveal his iniquity;</p>
<p class="poetry">the earth rises up against him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:28</span> A flood will carry off his house,</p>
<p class="poetry">rushing waters on the day of God’s wrath. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:29</span> Such is the lot God allots the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the heritage of his appointment from God.” </p>

</body>
</html>