<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 34</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 34</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Death of Moses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:1</span> Then Moses ascended from the rift valley plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the summit of Pisgah, which is opposite Jericho. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> showed him the whole land—Gilead to Dan, <span class="verse">34:2</span> and all of Naphtali, the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, all the land of Judah as far as the distant sea, <span class="verse">34:3</span> the Negev, and the plain of the Valley of Jericho, the city of date palm trees, as far as Zoar. <span class="verse">34:4</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to him, “This is the land I promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob when I said, ‘I will give it to your descendants.’ I have let you see it, but you will not cross over there.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:5</span> So Moses, the servant of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, died there in the land of Moab as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had said. <span class="verse">34:6</span> He buried him in the valley in the land of Moab near Beth Peor, but no one knows his exact burial place to this very day. <span class="verse">34:7</span> Moses was 120 years old when he died, but his eye was not dull nor had his vitality departed. <span class="verse">34:8</span> The Israelites mourned for Moses in the rift valley plains of Moab for thirty days; then the days of mourning for Moses ended. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Epitaph for Moses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:9</span> Now Joshua son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had placed his hands on him; and the Israelites listened to him and did just what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses. <span class="verse">34:10</span> No prophet ever again arose in Israel like Moses, who knew the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> face to face. <span class="verse">34:11</span> He did all the signs and wonders the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, all his servants, and the whole land, <span class="verse">34:12</span> and he displayed great power and awesome might in view of all Israel. </p>

</body>
</html>