<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Brevity of Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:1</span> “Man, born of woman, </p>
<p class="poetry">lives but a few days, and they are full of trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:2</span> He grows up like a flower and then withers away; </p>
<p class="poetry">he flees like a shadow, and does not remain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:3</span> Do you fix your eye on such a one? </p>
<p class="poetry">And do you bring me before you for judgment? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:4</span> Who can make a clean thing come from an unclean? </p>
<p class="poetry">No one! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:5</span> Since man’s days are determined, </p>
<p class="poetry">the number of his months is under your control; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have set his limit and he cannot pass it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:6</span> Look away from him and let him desist, </p>
<p class="poetry">until he fulfills his time like a hired man. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Inevitability of Death</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:7</span> “But there is hope for a tree: </p>
<p class="poetry">If it is cut down, it will sprout again,</p>
<p class="poetry">and its new shoots will not fail. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:8</span> Although its roots may grow old in the ground</p>
<p class="poetry">and its stump begins to die in the soil, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:9</span> at the scent of water it will flourish </p>
<p class="poetry">and put forth shoots like a new plant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:10</span> But man dies and is powerless; </p>
<p class="poetry">he expires—and where is he? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:11</span> As water disappears from the sea, </p>
<p class="poetry">or a river drains away and dries up, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:12</span> so man lies down and does not rise;</p>
<p class="poetry">until the heavens are no more, </p>
<p class="poetry">they will not awake</p>
<p class="poetry">nor arise from their sleep. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Possibility of Another Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:13</span> “O that you would hide me in Sheol, </p>
<p class="poetry">and conceal me till your anger has passed! </p>
<p class="poetry">O that you would set me a time </p>
<p class="poetry">and then remember me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:14</span> If a man dies, will he live again? </p>
<p class="poetry">All the days of my hard service I will wait </p>
<p class="poetry">until my release comes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:15</span> You will call and I —I will answer you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will long for the creature you have made. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Present Condition </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:16</span> “Surely now you count my steps; </p>
<p class="poetry">then you would not mark my sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:17</span> My offenses would be sealed up in a bag; </p>
<p class="poetry">you would cover over my sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:18</span> But as a mountain falls away and crumbles, </p>
<p class="poetry">and as a rock will be removed from its place, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:19</span> as water wears away stones,</p>
<p class="poetry">and torrents wash away the soil, </p>
<p class="poetry">so you destroy man’s hope. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:20</span> You overpower him once for all, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he departs;</p>
<p class="poetry">you change his appearance </p>
<p class="poetry">and send him away.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:21</span> If his sons are honored, </p>
<p class="poetry">he does not know it; </p>
<p class="poetry">if they are brought low, </p>
<p class="poetry">he does not see it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:22</span> His flesh only has pain for him, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he mourns for himself.” </p>

</body>
</html>