<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 34</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 34</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Dinah and the Shechemites</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:1</span> Now Dinah, Leah’s daughter whom she bore to Jacob, went to meet the young women of the land. <span class="verse">34:2</span> When Shechem son of Hamor the Hivite, who ruled that area, saw her, he grabbed her, forced himself on her, and sexually assaulted her. <span class="verse">34:3</span> Then he became very attached to Dinah, Jacob’s daughter. He fell in love with the young woman and spoke romantically to her. <span class="verse">34:4</span> Shechem said to his father Hamor, “Acquire this young girl as my wife.” <span class="verse">34:5</span> When Jacob heard that Shechem had violated his daughter Dinah, his sons were with the livestock in the field. So Jacob remained silent until they came in.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:6</span> Then Shechem’s father Hamor went to speak with Jacob about Dinah. <span class="verse">34:7</span> Now Jacob’s sons had come in from the field when they heard the news. They were offended and very angry because Shechem had disgraced Israel by sexually assaulting Jacob’s daughter, a crime that should not be committed. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:8</span> But Hamor made this appeal to them: “My son Shechem is in love with your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife. <span class="verse">34:9</span> Intermarry with us. Let us marry your daughters, and take our daughters as wives for yourselves. <span class="verse">34:10</span> You may live among us, and the land will be open to you. Live in it, travel freely in it, and acquire property in it.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:11</span> Then Shechem said to Dinah’s father and brothers, “Let me find favor in your sight, and whatever you require of me I’ll give. <span class="verse">34:12</span> You can make the bride price and the gift I must bring very expensive, and I’ll give whatever you ask of me. Just give me the young woman as my wife!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:13</span> Jacob’s sons answered Shechem and his father Hamor deceitfully when they spoke because Shechem had violated their sister Dinah. <span class="verse">34:14</span> They said to them, “We cannot give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for it would be a disgrace to us. <span class="verse">34:15</span> We will give you our consent on this one condition: You must become like us by circumcising all your males. <span class="verse">34:16</span> Then we will give you our daughters to marry, and we will take your daughters as wives for ourselves, and we will live among you and become one people. <span class="verse">34:17</span> But if you do not agree to our terms by being circumcised, then we will take our sister and depart.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:18</span> Their offer pleased Hamor and his son Shechem. <span class="verse">34:19</span> The young man did not delay in doing what they asked because he wanted Jacob’s daughter Dinah badly. (Now he was more important than anyone in his father’s household.) <span class="verse">34:20</span> So Hamor and his son Shechem went to the gate of their city and spoke to the men of their city, <span class="verse">34:21</span> “These men are at peace with us. So let them live in the land and travel freely in it, for the land is wide enough for them. We will take their daughters for wives, and we will give them our daughters to marry. <span class="verse">34:22</span> Only on this one condition will these men consent to live with us and become one people: They demand that every male among us be circumcised just as they are circumcised. <span class="verse">34:23</span> If we do so, won’t their livestock, their property, and all their animals become ours? So let’s consent to their demand, so they will live among us.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:24</span> All the men who assembled at the city gate agreed with Hamor and his son Shechem. Every male who assembled at the city gate was circumcised. <span class="verse">34:25</span> In three days, when they were still in pain, two of Jacob’s sons, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brothers, each took his sword and went to the unsuspecting city and slaughtered every male. <span class="verse">34:26</span> They killed Hamor and his son Shechem with the sword, took Dinah from Shechem’s house, and left. <span class="verse">34:27</span> Jacob’s sons killed them and looted the city because their sister had been violated. <span class="verse">34:28</span> They took their flocks, herds, and donkeys, as well as everything in the city and in the surrounding fields. <span class="verse">34:29</span> They captured as plunder all their wealth, all their little ones, and their wives, including everything in the houses. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">34:30</span> Then Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, “You have brought ruin on me by making me a foul odor among the inhabitants of the land—among the Canaanites and the Perizzites. I am few in number; they will join forces against me and attack me, and both I and my family will be destroyed!” <span class="verse">34:31</span> But Simeon and Levi replied, “Should he treat our sister like a common prostitute?” </p>

</body>
</html>