<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Appeal of Wisdom </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Does not wisdom call out?</p>
<p class="poetry">Does not understanding raise her voice? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:2</span> At the top of the prominent places along the way,</p>
<p class="poetry">at the intersection of the paths she has taken her stand; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:3</span> beside the gates opening into the city,</p>
<p class="poetry">at the entrance of the doorways she cries out: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:4</span> “To you, O people, I call out,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my voice calls to all mankind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:5</span> You who are naive, discern wisdom!</p>
<p class="poetry">And you fools, understand discernment! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:6</span> Listen, for I will speak excellent things, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my lips will utter what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:7</span> For my mouth speaks truth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my lips hate wickedness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:8</span> All the words of my mouth are righteous; </p>
<p class="poetry">there is nothing in them twisted or crooked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> All of them are clear to the discerning</p>
<p class="poetry">and upright to those who find knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> Receive my instruction rather than silver,</p>
<p class="poetry">and knowledge rather than choice gold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:11</span> For wisdom is better than rubies,</p>
<p class="poetry">and desirable things cannot be compared to her.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> “I, wisdom, have dwelt with prudence, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I find knowledge and discretion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:13</span> The fear of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is to hate evil;</p>
<p class="poetry">I hate arrogant pride and the evil way</p>
<p class="poetry">and perverse utterances. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Counsel and sound wisdom belong to me; </p>
<p class="poetry">I possess understanding and might. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:15</span> By me kings reign,</p>
<p class="poetry">and by me potentates decree righteousness; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:16</span> by me princes rule,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as nobles and all righteous judges. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:17</span> I will love those who love me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those who seek me diligently will find me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:18</span> Riches and honor are with me,</p>
<p class="poetry">long-lasting wealth and righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:19</span> My fruit is better than the purest gold, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my harvest is better than choice silver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:20</span> I walk in the path of righteousness,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the pathway of justice, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:21</span> that I may cause those who love me to inherit wealth,</p>
<p class="poetry">and that I may fill their treasuries. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:22</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> created me as the beginning of his works, </p>
<p class="poetry">before his deeds of long ago.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:23</span> From eternity I have been fashioned, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the beginning, from before the world existed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:24</span> When there were no deep oceans I was born, </p>
<p class="poetry">when there were no springs overflowing with water; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:25</span> before the mountains were set in place—</p>
<p class="poetry">before the hills—I was born, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:26</span> before he made the earth and its fields, </p>
<p class="poetry">or the top soil of the world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:27</span> When he established the heavens, I was there;</p>
<p class="poetry">when he marked out the horizon over the face of the deep, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:28</span> when he established the clouds above,</p>
<p class="poetry">when he secured the fountains of the deep, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:29</span> when he gave the sea his decree </p>
<p class="poetry">that the waters should not pass over his command, </p>
<p class="poetry">when he marked out the foundations of the earth, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:30</span> then I was beside him as a master craftsman, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I was his delight day by day,</p>
<p class="poetry">rejoicing before him at all times, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:31</span> rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and delighting in its people. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">8:32</span> “So now, children, listen to me;</p>
<p class="poetry">blessed are those who keep my ways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:33</span> Listen to my instruction so that you may be wise, </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not neglect it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:34</span> Blessed is the one who listens to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">watching at my doors day by day,</p>
<p class="poetry">waiting beside my doorway. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:35</span> For the one who finds me has found life</p>
<p class="poetry">and received favor from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:36</span> But the one who misses me brings harm to himself; </p>
<p class="poetry">all who hate me love death.”</p>

</body>
</html>