<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Nahum 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Nahum<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Reason for Judgment: Sins of Nineveh</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Woe to the city guilty of bloodshed! </p>
<p class="poetry">She is full of lies; </p>
<p class="poetry">she is filled with plunder; </p>
<p class="poetry">she has hoarded her spoil! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Portrayal of the Destruction of Nineveh</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> The chariot drivers will crack their whips; </p>
<p class="poetry">the chariot wheels will shake the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry">The chariot horses will gallop; </p>
<p class="poetry">the war chariots will bolt forward! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> The charioteers will charge ahead; </p>
<p class="poetry">their swords will flash </p>
<p class="poetry">and their spears will glimmer! </p>
<p class="poetry">There will be many people slain; </p>
<p class="poetry">there will be piles of the dead</p>
<p class="poetry">and countless casualties —</p>
<p class="poetry">so many that people will stumble over the corpses. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Taunt against the Harlot City</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> Because you have acted like a wanton prostitute —</p>
<p class="poetry">a seductive mistress who practices sorcery, </p>
<p class="poetry">who enslaves nations by her harlotry, </p>
<p class="poetry">and entices peoples by her sorcery —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> “I am against you,” declares the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will strip off your clothes! </p>
<p class="poetry">I will show your nakedness to the nations</p>
<p class="poetry">and your shame to the kingdoms. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> I will pelt you with filth; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will treat you with contempt;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will make you a public spectacle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Everyone who sees you will turn away from you in disgust;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will say, ‘Nineveh has been devastated!</p>
<p class="poetry">Who will lament for her?’</p>
<p class="poetry">There will be no one to comfort you!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Nineveh Will Suffer the Same Fate as Thebes</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> You are no more secure than Thebes —</p>
<p class="poetry">she was located on the banks of the Nile;</p>
<p class="poetry">the waters surrounded her—</p>
<p class="poetry">her rampart was the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">the water was her wall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Cush and Egypt had limitless strength; </p>
<p class="poetry">Put and the Libyans were among her allies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> Yet she went into captivity as an exile; </p>
<p class="poetry">even her infants were smashed to pieces at the head of every street.</p>
<p class="poetry">They cast lots for her nobility; </p>
<p class="poetry">all her dignitaries were bound with chains. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> You too will act like drunkards; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will go into hiding; </p>
<p class="poetry">you too will seek refuge from the enemy. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Assyrian Defenses Will Fail </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> All your fortifications will be like fig trees with first-ripe fruit: </p>
<p class="poetry">If they are shaken, their figs will fall into the mouth of the eater. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> Your warriors will be like women in your midst;</p>
<p class="poetry">the gates of your land will be wide open to your enemies;</p>
<p class="poetry">fire will consume the bars of your gates. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> Draw yourselves water for a siege! </p>
<p class="poetry">Strengthen your fortifications!</p>
<p class="poetry">Trample the mud and tread the clay!</p>
<p class="poetry">Make mud bricks to strengthen your walls! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> There the fire will consume you;</p>
<p class="poetry">the sword will cut you down;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will devour you like the young locust would.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Assyrian Defenders Will Flee</p><p class="poetry">Multiply yourself like the young locust;</p>
<p class="poetry">multiply yourself like the flying locust! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> Increase your merchants more than the stars of heaven!</p>
<p class="poetry">They are like the young locust that sheds its skin and flies away.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> Your courtiers are like locusts,</p>
<p class="poetry">your officials are like a swarm of locusts!</p>
<p class="poetry">They encamp in the walls on a cold day,</p>
<p class="poetry">yet when the sun rises, they fly away, </p>
<p class="poetry">and no one knows where they are. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concluding Dirge</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> Your shepherds are sleeping, O king of Assyria.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your officers are slumbering! </p>
<p class="poetry">Your people are scattered like sheep on the mountains,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there is no one to regather them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> Your destruction is like an incurable wound; </p>
<p class="poetry">your demise is like a fatal injury. </p>
<p class="poetry">All who hear what has happened to you will clap their hands for joy, </p>
<p class="poetry">for no one ever escaped your endless cruelty! </p>

</body>
</html>