<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 95</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 95</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:1</span> Come, let us sing for joy to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let us shout out praises to our Protector who delivers us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:2</span> Let us enter his presence with thanksgiving.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let us shout out to him in celebration. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:3</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is a great God,</p>
<p class="poetry">a great king who is superior to all gods. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:4</span> The depths of the earth are in his hand, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the mountain peaks belong to him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:5</span> The sea is his, for he made it.</p>
<p class="poetry">His hands formed the dry land.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:6</span> Come, let us bow down and worship. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let us kneel before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our Creator.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:7</span> For he is our God;</p>
<p class="poetry">we are the people of his pasture,</p>
<p class="poetry">the sheep he owns. </p>
<p class="poetry">Today, if only you would obey him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:8</span> He says, “Do not be stubborn like they were at Meribah, </p>
<p class="poetry">like they were that day at Massah in the wilderness, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:9</span> where your ancestors challenged my authority, </p>
<p class="poetry">and tried my patience, even though they had seen my work. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:10</span> For forty years I was continually disgusted with that generation,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I said, ‘These people desire to go astray; </p>
<p class="poetry">they do not obey my commands.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">95:11</span> So I made a vow in my anger,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘They will never enter into the resting place I had set aside for them.’” </p>

</body>
</html>