<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Title/Superscription</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:1</span> Solomon’s Most Excellent Love Song. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Desire for Love</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover: </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> Oh, how I wish you would kiss me passionately! </p>
<p class="poetry">For your lovemaking is more delightful than wine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> The fragrance of your colognes is delightful; </p>
<p class="poetry">your name is like the finest perfume. </p>
<p class="poetry">No wonder the young women adore you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> Draw me after you; let us hurry! </p>
<p class="poetry">May the king bring me into his bedroom chambers! </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Maidens <b><i>to the Lover:</i></b></p><p class="poetry">We will rejoice and delight in you; </p>
<p class="poetry">we will praise your love more than wine.</p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry">How rightly the young women adore you!</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Country Maiden and the Daughters of Jerusalem</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to the Maidens:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> I am dark but lovely, O maidens of Jerusalem,</p>
<p class="poetry">dark like the tents of Qedar, </p>
<p class="poetry">lovely like the tent curtains of Salmah. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> Do not stare at me because I am dark,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the sun has burned my skin. </p>
<p class="poetry">My brothers were angry with me;</p>
<p class="poetry">they made me the keeper of the vineyards.</p>
<p class="poetry">Alas, my own vineyard I could not keep! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Shepherd and the Shepherdess</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> Tell me, O you whom my heart loves,</p>
<p class="poetry">where do you pasture your sheep?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where do you rest your sheep during the midday heat?</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell me lest I wander around </p>
<p class="poetry">beside the flocks of your companions! </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> If you do not know, O most beautiful of women,</p>
<p class="poetry">simply follow the tracks of my flock,</p>
<p class="poetry">and pasture your little lambs</p>
<p class="poetry">beside the tents of the shepherds. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Beautiful Mare and the Fragrant Myrrh</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> O my beloved, you are like a mare </p>
<p class="poetry">among Pharaoh’s stallions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> Your cheeks are beautiful with ornaments;</p>
<p class="poetry">your neck is lovely with strings of jewels. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> We will make for you gold ornaments</p>
<p class="poetry">studded with silver. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> While the king was at his banqueting table, </p>
<p class="poetry">my nard gave forth its fragrance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> My beloved is like a fragrant pouch of myrrh </p>
<p class="poetry">spending the night between my breasts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> My beloved is like a cluster of henna blossoms </p>
<p class="poetry">in the vineyards of En Gedi. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Mutual Praise and Admiration</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> Oh, how beautiful you are, my beloved! </p>
<p class="poetry">Oh, how beautiful you are!</p>
<p class="poetry">Your eyes are like doves! </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> Oh, how handsome you are, my lover! </p>
<p class="poetry">Oh, how delightful you are!</p>
<p class="poetry">The lush foliage is our canopied bed; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> the cedars are the beams of our bedroom chamber;</p>
<p class="poetry">the pines are the rafters of our bedroom.</p>

</body>
</html>