<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joel 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joel<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> This is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message that came to Joel the son of Pethuel: </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Locust Plague Foreshadows the Day of the Lord</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> Listen to this, you elders; </p>
<p class="poetry">pay attention, all inhabitants of the land.</p>
<p class="poetry">Has anything like this ever happened in your whole life </p>
<p class="poetry">or in the lifetime of your ancestors? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> Tell your children about it,</p>
<p class="poetry">have your children tell their children,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their children the following generation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> What the <i>gazam</i>-locust left the <i>‘arbeh</i>-locust consumed, </p>
<p class="poetry">what the <i>‘arbeh</i>-locust left the <i>yeleq</i>-locust consumed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and what the <i>yeleq</i>-locust left the <i>hasil</i>-locust consumed. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">1:5</span> Wake up, you drunkards, and weep!</p>
<p class="poetry">Wail, all you wine drinkers, </p>
<p class="poetry">because the sweet wine has been taken away from you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> For a nation has invaded my land,</p>
<p class="poetry">mighty and without number.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their teeth are lion’s teeth;</p>
<p class="poetry">they have the fangs of a lioness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> They have destroyed my vines; </p>
<p class="poetry">they have turned my fig trees into mere splinters.</p>
<p class="poetry">They have completely stripped off the bark and thrown it aside;</p>
<p class="poetry">the twigs are stripped bare. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Call to Lament</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> Wail like a young virgin clothed in sackcloth,</p>
<p class="poetry">lamenting the death of her husband to be. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> No one brings grain offerings or drink offerings </p>
<p class="poetry">to the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> anymore. </p>
<p class="poetry">So the priests, those who serve the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, are in mourning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> The crops of the fields have been destroyed. </p>
<p class="poetry">The ground is in mourning because the grain has perished.</p>
<p class="poetry">The fresh wine has dried up;</p>
<p class="poetry">the olive oil languishes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> Be distressed, farmers;</p>
<p class="poetry">wail, vinedressers, over the wheat and the barley.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the harvest of the field has perished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> The vine has dried up;</p>
<p class="poetry">the fig tree languishes—</p>
<p class="poetry">the pomegranate, date, and apple as well. </p>
<p class="poetry">In fact, all the trees of the field have dried up.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, the joy of the people has dried up! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">1:13</span> Get dressed and lament, you priests.</p>
<p class="poetry">Wail, you who minister at the altar.</p>
<p class="poetry">Come, spend the night in sackcloth, you servants of my God,</p>
<p class="poetry">because no one brings grain offerings or drink offerings </p>
<p class="poetry">to the temple of your God anymore. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> Announce a holy fast; </p>
<p class="poetry">proclaim a sacred assembly.</p>
<p class="poetry">Gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land</p>
<p class="poetry">to the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">and cry out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> How awful that day will be! </p>
<p class="poetry">For the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is near;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will come as destruction from the Divine Destroyer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> Our food has been cut off right before our eyes! </p>
<p class="poetry">There is no longer any joy or gladness in the temple of our God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> The grains of seed have shriveled beneath their shovels. </p>
<p class="poetry">Storehouses have been decimated,</p>
<p class="poetry">and granaries have been torn down, </p>
<p class="poetry">because the grain has dried up.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:18</span> Listen to the cattle groan! </p>
<p class="poetry">The herds of livestock wander around in confusion </p>
<p class="poetry">because they have no pasture.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even the flocks of sheep are suffering. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">1:19</span> To you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I call out for help, </p>
<p class="poetry">for fire has burned up the pastures of the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">flames have razed all the trees in the fields. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:20</span> Even the wild animals cry out to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the river beds have dried up;</p>
<p class="poetry">fire has destroyed the pastures of the wilderness. </p>

</body>
</html>