<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Superscription</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> The following is a record of what Jeremiah son of Hilkiah prophesied. He was one of the priests who lived at Anathoth in the territory of the tribe of Benjamin. <span class="verse">1:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to him in the thirteenth year that Josiah son of Amon ruled over Judah. <span class="verse">1:3</span> It also came in the days of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, and continued until the eleventh year of Zedekiah, son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the people of Jerusalem were taken into exile in the fifth month of that year. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jeremiah’s Call and Commission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> “Before I formed you in your mother’s womb I chose you. </p>
<p class="poetry">Before you were born I set you apart.</p>
<p class="poetry">I appointed you to be a prophet to the nations.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:6</span> I answered, “Oh, Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, Really I do not know how to speak well enough for that, for I am too young.” <span class="verse">1:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to me, “Do not say, ‘I am too young.’ But go to whomever I send you and say whatever I tell you. <span class="verse">1:8</span> Do not be afraid of those to whom I send you, for I will be with you to protect you,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">1:9</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> reached out his hand and touched my mouth and said to me, “I will most assuredly give you the words you are to speak for me. <span class="verse">1:10</span> Know for certain that I hereby give you the authority to announce to nations and kingdoms that they will be uprooted and torn down, destroyed and demolished, rebuilt and firmly planted.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Visions Confirming Jeremiah’s Call and Commission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:11</span> Later the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me, “What do you see, Jeremiah?” I answered, “I see a branch of an almond tree.” <span class="verse">1:12</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “You have observed correctly. This means I am watching to make sure my threats are carried out.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me a second time, “What do you see?” I answered, “I see a pot of boiling water; it is tipped away from the north.” <span class="verse">1:14</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “From the north destruction will break out on all who live in the land. <span class="verse">1:15</span> For I will soon summon all the peoples of the kingdoms of the north,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. “They will come and their kings will set up their thrones near the entrances of the gates of Jerusalem. They will attack all the walls surrounding it and all the towns in Judah. <span class="verse">1:16</span> In this way I will pass sentence on the people of Jerusalem and Judah because of all their wickedness. For they rejected me and offered sacrifices to other gods, worshiping what they made with their own hands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:17</span> “But you, Jeremiah, get yourself ready! Go and tell these people everything I instruct you to say. Do not be terrified of them, or I will give you good reason to be terrified of them. <span class="verse">1:18</span> I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, hereby promise to make you as strong as a fortified city, an iron pillar, and a bronze wall. You will be able to stand up against all who live in the land, including the kings of Judah, its officials, its priests and all the people of the land. <span class="verse">1:19</span> They will attack you but they will not be able to overcome you, for I will be with you to rescue you,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>