<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Will Raise Up the Assyrians to Attack Israel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Sound the alarm! </p>
<p class="poetry">An eagle looms over the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">For they have broken their covenant with me </p>
<p class="poetry">and have rebelled against my law. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:2</span> Israel cries out to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">“My God, we acknowledge you!”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:3</span> But Israel has rejected what is morally good;</p>
<p class="poetry">so an enemy will pursue him.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Political and Cultic Sin of Israel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:4</span> They enthroned kings without my consent. </p>
<p class="poetry">They appointed princes without my approval. </p>
<p class="poetry">They made idols out of their silver and gold,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they will be destroyed! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:5</span> O Samaria, he has rejected your calf idol.</p>
<p class="poetry">My anger burns against them!</p>
<p class="poetry">They will not survive much longer without being punished, </p>
<p class="poetry">even though they are Israelites!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:6</span> That idol was made by a workman—it is not God!</p>
<p class="poetry">The calf idol of Samaria will be broken to bits. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Fertility Cultists Will Become Infertile</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:7</span> They sow the wind,</p>
<p class="poetry">and so they will reap the whirlwind!</p>
<p class="poetry">The stalk does not have any standing grain;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will not produce any flour.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even if it were to yield grain,</p>
<p class="poetry">foreigners would swallow it all up.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:8</span> Israel will be swallowed up among the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will be like a worthless piece of pottery. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s Hired Lovers</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> They have gone up to Assyria, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a wild donkey that wanders off.</p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim has hired prostitutes as lovers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> Even though they have hired lovers among the nations, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will soon gather them together for judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then they will begin to waste away</p>
<p class="poetry">under the oppression of a mighty king. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Sacrifices Ineffective without Moral Obedience</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:11</span> Although Ephraim has built many altars for sin offerings,</p>
<p class="poetry">these have become altars for sinning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> I spelled out my law for him in great detail,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they regard it as something totally unknown to them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:13</span> They offer up sacrificial gifts to me</p>
<p class="poetry">and eat the meat,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does not accept their sacrifices. </p>
<p class="poetry">Soon he will remember their wrongdoing,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will punish their sins,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they will return to Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Israel has forgotten his Maker and built royal palaces,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Judah has built many fortified  cities.</p>
<p class="poetry">But I will send fire on their cities;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will consume their royal citadels. </p>

</body>
</html>