<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 30</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 30</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Lament Over Egypt</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">30:2</span> “Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“‘Wail, “Alas, the day is here!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:3</span> For the day is near,</p>
<p class="poetry">the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is near;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will be a day of storm clouds, </p>
<p class="poetry">it will be a time of judgment for the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:4</span> A sword will come against Egypt</p>
<p class="poetry">and panic will overtake Ethiopia</p>
<p class="poetry">when the slain fall in Egypt</p>
<p class="poetry">and they carry away her wealth </p>
<p class="poetry">and dismantle her foundations. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:5</span> Ethiopia, Put, Lud, all the  foreigners, Libya, and the people of the covenant land will die by the sword along with them.</p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">30:6</span> “‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">Egypt’s supporters will fall;</p>
<p class="poetry">her confident pride will crumble. </p>
<p class="poetry">From Migdol to Syene they will die by the sword within her, </p>
<p class="poetry">declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:7</span> They will be desolate among desolate lands,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their cities will be among ruined cities. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:8</span> They will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">when I ignite a fire in Egypt</p>
<p class="poetry">and all her allies are defeated. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:9</span> “‘On that day messengers will go out from me in ships to frighten overconfident Ethiopia; panic will overtake them on the day of Egypt’s doom; for beware—it is coming! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">30:10</span> “‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">I will put an end to the hordes of Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the hand of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:11</span> He and his people with him, </p>
<p class="poetry">the most terrifying of the nations, </p>
<p class="poetry">will be brought there to destroy the land.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will draw their swords against Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">and fill the land with corpses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:12</span> I will dry up the waterways</p>
<p class="poetry">and hand the land over to evil men.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will make the land and everything in it desolate by the hand of foreigners.</p>
<p class="poetry">I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have spoken! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">30:13</span> “‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">I will destroy the idols,</p>
<p class="poetry">and put an end to the gods of Memphis.</p>
<p class="poetry">There will no longer be a prince from the land of Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">so I will make the land of Egypt fearful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:14</span> I will desolate Pathros,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will ignite a fire in Zoan,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will execute judgments on Thebes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:15</span> I will pour out my anger upon Pelusium, </p>
<p class="poetry">the stronghold of Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will cut off the hordes of Thebes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:16</span> I will ignite a fire in Egypt; </p>
<p class="poetry">Syene will writhe in agony, </p>
<p class="poetry">Thebes will be broken down,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Memphis will face enemies every day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:17</span> The young men of On and of Pi Beseth will die by the sword;</p>
<p class="poetry">and the cities will go into captivity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:18</span> In Tahpanhes the day will be dark </p>
<p class="poetry">when I break the yoke of Egypt there. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her confident pride will cease within her;</p>
<p class="poetry">a cloud will cover her, and her daughters will go into captivity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:19</span> I will execute judgments on Egypt.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:20</span> In the eleventh year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">30:21</span> “Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt. Look, it has not been bandaged for healing or set with a dressing so that it might become strong enough to grasp a sword. <span class="verse">30:22</span> Therefore this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Look, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and I will break his arms, the strong arm and the broken one, and I will make the sword drop from his hand. <span class="verse">30:23</span> I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among foreign countries. <span class="verse">30:24</span> I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and I will place my sword in his hand, but I will break the arms of Pharaoh, and he will groan like the fatally wounded before the king of Babylon. <span class="verse">30:25</span> I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, but the arms of Pharaoh will fall limp. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> when I place my sword in the hand of the king of Babylon and he extends it against the land of Egypt. <span class="verse">30:26</span> I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among foreign countries. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.” </p>

</body>
</html>