<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Hypocrisy of False Fasting</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> In King Darius’ fourth year, on the fourth day of Kislev, the ninth month, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to Zechariah. <span class="verse">7:2</span> Now the people of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-Melech and their companions to seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s favor<span class="verse">7:3</span> by asking both the priests of the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies and the prophets, “Should we weep in the fifth month, fasting as we have done over the years?” <span class="verse">7:4</span> The message of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies then came to me, <span class="verse">7:5</span> “Speak to all the people and priests of the land as follows: ‘When you fasted and lamented in the fifth and seventh months through all these seventy years, did you truly fast for me—for me, indeed? <span class="verse">7:6</span> And now when you eat and drink, are you not doing so for yourselves? <span class="verse">7:7</span> Should you not have obeyed the words that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> cried out through the former prophets when Jerusalem was peacefully inhabited and her surrounding cities, the Negev, and the foothills were also populated?’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:8</span> Again the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to Zechariah: <span class="verse">7:9</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies said, ‘Exercise true judgment and show brotherhood and compassion to each other. <span class="verse">7:10</span> You must not oppress the widow, the orphan, the resident foreigner, or the poor, nor should anyone secretly plot evil against his fellow citizen.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:11</span> “But they refused to pay attention, turning away stubbornly and stopping their ears so they could not hear. <span class="verse">7:12</span> Indeed, they made their hearts as hard as diamond, so that they could not obey the law of Moses and the other words the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies had sent by his Spirit through the former prophets. Therefore, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies poured out great wrath. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:13</span> “‘Just as I called out, but they would not obey, so they will call out, but I will not listen,’ the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says. <span class="verse">7:14</span> ‘Rather, I will sweep them away in a storm into all the nations they are not familiar with.’ Thus the land became desolate because of them, with no one crossing through or returning, for they had made the fruitful land a waste.” </p>

</body>
</html>