<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Timothy 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Timothy<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Serving Faithfully Despite Hardship</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> So you, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">2:2</span> And what you heard me say in the presence of many witnesses entrust to faithful people who will be competent to teach others as well. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Take your share of suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">2:4</span> No one in military service gets entangled in matters of everyday life; otherwise he will not please the one who recruited him. <span class="verse">2:5</span> Also, if anyone competes as an athlete, he will not be crowned as the winner unless he competes according to the rules. <span class="verse">2:6</span> The farmer who works hard ought to have the first share of the crops. <span class="verse">2:7</span> Think about what I am saying and the Lord will give you understanding of all this. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David; such is my gospel, <span class="verse">2:9</span> for which I suffer hardship to the point of imprisonment as a criminal, but God’s message is not imprisoned! <span class="verse">2:10</span> So I endure all things for the sake of those chosen by God, that they too may obtain salvation in Christ Jesus and its eternal glory. <span class="verse">2:11</span> This saying is trustworthy: </p>
<p class="poetry">If we died with him, we will also live with him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> If we endure, we will also reign with him. </p>
<p class="poetry">If we deny him, he will also deny us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> If we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, since he cannot deny himself. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Dealing with False Teachers</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> Remind people of these things and solemnly charge them before the Lord not to wrangle over words. This is of no benefit; it just brings ruin on those who listen. <span class="verse">2:15</span> Make every effort to present yourself before God as a proven worker who does not need to be ashamed, teaching the message of truth accurately. <span class="verse">2:16</span> But avoid profane chatter, because those occupied with it will stray further and further into ungodliness, <span class="verse">2:17</span> and their message will spread its infection like gangrene. Hymenaeus and Philetus are in this group. <span class="verse">2:18</span> They have strayed from the truth by saying that the resurrection has already occurred, and they are undermining some people’s faith. <span class="verse">2:19</span> However, God’s solid foundation remains standing, bearing this seal: “<b><i>The Lord knows those who are his</i></b>,” and “Everyone who confesses the name of the Lord must turn away from evil.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:20</span> Now in a wealthy home there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also ones made of wood and of clay, and some are for honorable use, but others for ignoble use. <span class="verse">2:21</span> So if someone cleanses himself of such behavior, he will be a vessel for honorable use, set apart, useful for the Master, prepared for every good work. <span class="verse">2:22</span> But keep away from youthful passions, and pursue righteousness, faithfulness, love, and peace, in company with others who call on the Lord from a pure heart. <span class="verse">2:23</span> But reject foolish and ignorant controversies, because you know they breed infighting. <span class="verse">2:24</span> And the Lord’s slave must not engage in heated disputes but be kind toward all, an apt teacher, patient, <span class="verse">2:25</span> correcting opponents with gentleness. Perhaps God will grant them repentance and then knowledge of the truth <span class="verse">2:26</span> and they will come to their senses and escape the devil’s trap where they are held captive to do his will. </p>

</body>
</html>