<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 35</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 35</h2><p class="psasuper">By David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, fight those who fight with me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Attack those who attack me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:2</span> Grab your small shield and large shield, </p>
<p class="poetry">and rise up to help me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:3</span> Use your spear and lance against those who chase me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Assure me with these words: “I am your deliverer.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:4</span> May those who seek my life be embarrassed and humiliated.</p>
<p class="poetry">May those who plan to harm me be turned back and ashamed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:5</span> May they be like wind-driven chaff,</p>
<p class="poetry">as the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> attacks them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:6</span> May their path be dark and slippery,</p>
<p class="poetry">as the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> chases them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:7</span> I did not harm them, but they hid a net to catch me</p>
<p class="poetry">and dug a pit to trap me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:8</span> Let destruction take them by surprise. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let the net they hid catch them.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let them fall into destruction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:9</span> Then I will rejoice in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">and be happy because of his deliverance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:10</span> With all my strength I will say, </p>
<p class="poetry">“O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who can compare to you?</p>
<p class="poetry">You rescue the oppressed from those who try to overpower them, </p>
<p class="poetry">the oppressed and needy from those who try to rob them.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:11</span> Violent men perjure themselves, </p>
<p class="poetry">and falsely accuse me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:12</span> They repay me evil for the good I have done; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am overwhelmed with sorrow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:13</span> When they were sick, I wore sackcloth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and refrained from eating food. </p>
<p class="poetry">(If I am lying, may my prayers go unanswered.) </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:14</span> I mourned for them as I would for a friend or my brother. </p>
<p class="poetry">I bowed down in sorrow as if I were mourning for my mother. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:15</span> But when I stumbled, they rejoiced and gathered together;</p>
<p class="poetry">they gathered together to ambush me. </p>
<p class="poetry">They tore at me without stopping to rest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:16</span> When I tripped, they taunted me relentlessly, </p>
<p class="poetry">and tried to bite me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:17</span> O Lord, how long are you going to watch this? </p>
<p class="poetry">Rescue me from their destructive attacks;</p>
<p class="poetry">guard my life from the young lions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:18</span> Then I will give you thanks in the great assembly; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will praise you before a large crowd of people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:19</span> Do not let those who are my enemies for no reason gloat over me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not let those who hate me without cause carry out their wicked schemes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:20</span> For they do not try to make peace with others, </p>
<p class="poetry">but plan ways to deceive those who live peacefully in the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:21</span> They are ready to devour me; </p>
<p class="poetry">they say, “Aha! Aha! We’ve got you!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:22</span> But you take notice, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; do not be silent!</p>
<p class="poetry">O Lord, do not remain far away from me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:23</span> Rouse yourself, wake up and vindicate me. </p>
<p class="poetry">My God and Lord, defend my just cause. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:24</span> Vindicate me by your justice, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not let them gloat over me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:25</span> Do not let them say to themselves, “Aha! We have what we wanted!” </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not let them say, “We have devoured him.”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:26</span> May those who rejoice in my troubles be totally embarrassed and ashamed. </p>
<p class="poetry">May those who arrogantly taunt me be covered with shame and humiliation. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:27</span> May those who desire my vindication shout for joy and rejoice.</p>
<p class="poetry">May they continually say, “May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> be praised, for he wants his servant to be secure.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:28</span> Then I will tell others about your justice, </p>
<p class="poetry">and praise you all day long. </p>

</body>
</html>