<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Nahum 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Nahum<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Proclamation of the Destruction of Nineveh</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:1</span> (2:2) An enemy who will scatter you, Nineveh, has advanced against you! </p>
<p class="poetry">Guard the rampart! </p>
<p class="poetry">Watch the road!</p>
<p class="poetry">Prepare yourselves for battle! </p>
<p class="poetry">Muster your mighty strength! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is about to restore the majesty of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the majesty of Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">though their enemies have plundered them </p>
<p class="poetry">and have destroyed their fields. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prophetic Vision of the Fall of Nineveh</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> The shields of his warriors are dyed red; </p>
<p class="poetry">the mighty soldiers are dressed in scarlet garments. </p>
<p class="poetry">The chariots are in flashing metal fittings </p>
<p class="poetry">on the day of battle; </p>
<p class="poetry">the soldiers brandish their spears. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> The chariots race madly through the streets,</p>
<p class="poetry">they rush back and forth in the broad plazas;</p>
<p class="poetry">they look like lightning bolts, </p>
<p class="poetry">they dash here and there like flashes of lightning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> The commander orders his officers;</p>
<p class="poetry">they stumble as they advance; </p>
<p class="poetry">they rush to the city wall, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they set up the covered siege tower. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> The sluice gates are opened; </p>
<p class="poetry">the royal palace is deluged and dissolves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> Nineveh is taken into exile and is led away; </p>
<p class="poetry">her slave girls moan like doves while they beat their breasts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Nineveh was like a pool of water throughout her days, </p>
<p class="poetry">but now her people are running away; </p>
<p class="poetry">she cries out: “Stop! Stop!”—</p>
<p class="poetry">but no one turns back. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Her conquerors cry out: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Plunder the silver! Plunder the gold!”</p>
<p class="poetry">There is no end to the treasure;</p>
<p class="poetry">riches of every kind of precious thing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> Destruction, devastation, and desolation! </p>
<p class="poetry">Hearts faint, knees tremble;</p>
<p class="poetry">every stomach churns, all their faces have turned pale! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Taunt against the Once-Mighty Lion</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Where now is the den of the lions </p>
<p class="poetry">and the feeding place of the young lions,</p>
<p class="poetry">where the lion, lioness, and lion cub once prowled </p>
<p class="poetry">and no one disturbed them? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> The lion tore apart as much prey as his cubs needed</p>
<p class="poetry">and strangled prey for his lionesses;</p>
<p class="poetry">he filled his lairs with prey</p>
<p class="poetry">and his dens with torn flesh.</p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Battle Cry of the Divine Warrior</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> “I am against you!” declares the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will burn your chariots with fire; </p>
<p class="poetry">the sword will devour your young lions. </p>
<p class="poetry">You will no longer prey upon the land; </p>
<p class="poetry">the voices of your messengers will no longer be heard.” </p>

</body>
</html>