<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Simeon’s Tribal Lands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:1</span> The second lot belonged to the tribe of Simeon by its clans. Their assigned land was in the middle of Judah’s assigned land. <span class="verse">19:2</span> Their assigned land included Beer Sheba, Moladah, <span class="verse">19:3</span> Hazar Shual, Balah, Ezem, <span class="verse">19:4</span> Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah, <span class="verse">19:5</span> Ziklag, Beth Marcaboth, Hazar Susah, <span class="verse">19:6</span> Beth Lebaoth, and Sharuhen—a total of thirteen cities and their towns, <span class="verse">19:7</span> Ain, Rimmon, Ether, and Ashan—a total of four cities and their towns, <span class="verse">19:8</span> as well as all the towns around these cities as far as Baalath Beer (Ramah of the Negev). This was the land assigned to the tribe of Simeon by its clans. <span class="verse">19:9</span> Simeon’s assigned land was taken from Judah’s allotted portion, for Judah’s territory was too large for them; so Simeon was assigned land within Judah. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Zebulun’s Tribal Lands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:10</span> The third lot belonged to the tribe of Zebulun by its clans. The border of their territory extended to Sarid. <span class="verse">19:11</span> Their border went up westward to Maralah and touched Dabbesheth and the valley near Jokneam. <span class="verse">19:12</span> From Sarid it turned eastward to the territory of Kisloth Tabor, extended to Daberath, and went up to Japhia. <span class="verse">19:13</span> From there it crossed eastward to Gath Hepher and Eth Kazin and extended to Rimmon, turning toward Neah. <span class="verse">19:14</span> It then turned on the north to Hannathon and ended at the Valley of Iphtah El. <span class="verse">19:15</span> Their territory included Kattah, Nahalal, Shimron, Idalah, and Bethlehem; in all they had twelve cities and their towns. <span class="verse">19:16</span> This was the land assigned to the tribe of Zebulun by its clans, including these cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Issachar’s Tribal Lands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:17</span> The fourth lot belonged to the tribe of Issachar by its clans. <span class="verse">19:18</span> Their assigned land included Jezreel, Kesulloth, Shunem, <span class="verse">19:19</span> Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath, <span class="verse">19:20</span> Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez, <span class="verse">19:21</span> Remeth, En Gannim, En Haddah and Beth Pazzez. <span class="verse">19:22</span> Their border touched Tabor, Shahazumah, and Beth Shemesh, and ended at the Jordan. They had sixteen cities and their towns. <span class="verse">19:23</span> This was the land assigned to the tribe of Issachar by its clans, including these cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Asher’s Tribal Lands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:24</span> The fifth lot belonged to the tribe of Asher by its clans. <span class="verse">19:25</span> Their territory included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Acshaph, <span class="verse">19:26</span> Alammelech, Amad, and Mishal. Their border touched Carmel to the west and Shihor Libnath. <span class="verse">19:27</span> It turned eastward toward Beth Dagon, touched Zebulun and the Valley of Iphtah El to the north, as well as Beth Emek and Neiel, and extended to Cabul on the north <span class="verse">19:28</span> and on to Ebron, Rehob, Hammon, and Kanah, as far as Greater Sidon. <span class="verse">19:29</span> It then turned toward Ramah as far as the fortified city of Tyre, turned to Hosah, and ended at the sea near Hebel, Achzib, <span class="verse">19:30</span> Umah, Aphek, and Rehob. In all they had twenty-two cities and their towns. <span class="verse">19:31</span> This was the land assigned to the tribe of Asher by its clans, including these cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Naphtali’s Tribal Lands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:32</span> The sixth lot belonged to the tribe of Naphtali by its clans. <span class="verse">19:33</span> Their border started at Heleph and the oak of Zaanannim, went to Adami Nekeb, Jabneel and on to Lakkum, and ended at the Jordan River. <span class="verse">19:34</span> It turned westward to Aznoth Tabor, extended from there to Hukok, touched Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west, and the Jordan on the east. <span class="verse">19:35</span> The fortified cities included Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Kinnereth, <span class="verse">19:36</span> Adamah, Ramah, Hazor, <span class="verse">19:37</span> Kedesh, Edrei, En Hazor, <span class="verse">19:38</span> Yiron, Migdal El, Horem, Beth Anath, and Beth Shemesh. In all they had nineteen cities and their towns. <span class="verse">19:39</span> This was the land assigned to the tribe of Naphtali by its clans, including these cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Dan’s Tribal Lands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:40</span> The seventh lot belonged to the tribe of Dan by its clans. <span class="verse">19:41</span> Their assigned land included Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir Shemesh, <span class="verse">19:42</span> Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah, <span class="verse">19:43</span> Elon, Timnah, Ekron, <span class="verse">19:44</span> Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Baalath, <span class="verse">19:45</span> Jehud, Bene Berak, Gath Rimmon, <span class="verse">19:46</span> the waters of Jarkon, and Rakkon, including the territory in front of Joppa. <span class="verse">19:47</span> (The Danites failed to conquer their territory, so they went up and fought with Leshem and captured it. They put the sword to it, took possession of it, and lived in it. They renamed it Dan after their ancestor.) <span class="verse">19:48</span> This was the land assigned to the tribe of Dan by its clans, including these cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Joshua Receives Land</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:49</span> When they finished dividing the land into its regions, the Israelites gave Joshua son of Nun some land. <span class="verse">19:50</span> As the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had instructed, they gave him the city he requested—Timnath Serah in the Ephraimite hill country. He built up the city and lived in it.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:51</span> These are the land assignments that Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the Israelite tribal leaders made by drawing lots in Shiloh before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at the entrance of the tent of meeting. So they finished dividing up the land. </p>

</body>
</html>