<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 50</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 50</h2><p class="psasuper">A psalm by Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:1</span> El, God, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken,</p>
<p class="poetry">and summoned the earth to come from the east and west. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:2</span> From Zion, the most beautiful of all places, </p>
<p class="poetry">God has come in splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:3</span> “May our God come</p>
<p class="poetry">and not be silent.”</p>
<p class="poetry">Consuming fire goes ahead of him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all around him a storm rages. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:4</span> He summons the heavens above,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the earth, so that he might judge his people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:5</span> He says: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Assemble my covenant people before me, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who ratified a covenant with me by sacrifice.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:6</span> The heavens declare his fairness, </p>
<p class="poetry">for God is judge. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:7</span> He says: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Listen, my people. I am speaking!</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen, Israel. I am accusing you. </p>
<p class="poetry">I am God, your God! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:8</span> I am not condemning you because of your sacrifices,</p>
<p class="poetry">or because of your burnt sacrifices that you continually offer me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:9</span> I do not need to take a bull from your household</p>
<p class="poetry">or goats from your sheepfolds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:10</span> For every wild animal in the forest belongs to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the cattle that graze on a thousand hills. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:11</span> I keep track of every bird in the hills,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the insects of the field are mine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:12</span> Even if I were hungry, I would not tell you,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the world and all it contains belong to me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:13</span> Do I eat the flesh of bulls?</p>
<p class="poetry">Do I drink the blood of goats? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:14</span> Present to God a thank offering.</p>
<p class="poetry">Repay your vows to the Most High. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:15</span> Pray to me when you are in trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will deliver you, and you will honor me.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:16</span> God says this to the evildoer: </p>
<p class="poetry">“How can you declare my commands,</p>
<p class="poetry">and talk about my covenant? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:17</span> For you hate instruction</p>
<p class="poetry">and reject my words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:18</span> When you see a thief, you join him; </p>
<p class="poetry">you associate with men who are unfaithful to their wives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:19</span> You do damage with words, </p>
<p class="poetry">and use your tongue to deceive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:20</span> You plot against your brother; </p>
<p class="poetry">you slander your own brother. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:21</span> When you did these things, I was silent, </p>
<p class="poetry">so you thought I was exactly like you. </p>
<p class="poetry">But now I will condemn you</p>
<p class="poetry">and state my case against you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:22</span> Carefully consider this, you who reject God. </p>
<p class="poetry">Otherwise I will rip you to shreds </p>
<p class="poetry">and no one will be able to rescue you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">50:23</span> Whoever presents a thank offering honors me. </p>
<p class="poetry">To whoever obeys my commands, I will reveal my power to deliver.” </p>

</body>
</html>