<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s Sin with the Moabite Women</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span>  When Israel lived in Shittim, the people began to commit sexual immorality with the daughters of Moab. <span class="verse">25:2</span> These women invited the people to the sacrifices of their gods; then the people ate and bowed down to their gods. <span class="verse">25:3</span> When Israel joined themselves to Baal Peor, the anger of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> flared up against Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Punishment</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, “Arrest all the leaders of the people, and hang them up before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in broad daylight, so that the fierce anger of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> may be turned away from Israel.” <span class="verse">25:5</span> So Moses said to the judges of Israel, “Each of you must execute those of his men who were joined to Baal Peor.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:6</span> Just then one of the Israelites came and brought to his brothers a Midianite woman in the plain view of Moses and of the whole community of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting. <span class="verse">25:7</span> When Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he got up from among the assembly, took a javelin in his hand, <span class="verse">25:8</span> and went after the Israelite man into the tent and thrust through the Israelite man and into the woman’s abdomen. So the plague was stopped from the Israelites. <span class="verse">25:9</span> Those that died in the plague were 24,000.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Aftermath</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">25:11</span> “Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my anger away from the Israelites, when he manifested such zeal for my sake among them, so that I did not consume the Israelites in my zeal. <span class="verse">25:12</span> Therefore, announce: ‘I am going to give to him my covenant of peace. <span class="verse">25:13</span> So it will be to him and his descendants after him a covenant of a permanent priesthood, because he has been zealous for his God, and has made atonement for the Israelites.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:14</span> Now the name of the Israelite who was stabbed—the one who was stabbed with the Midianite woman—was Zimri son of Salu, a leader of a clan of the Simeonites. <span class="verse">25:15</span> The name of the Midianite woman who was killed was Cozbi daughter of Zur. He was a leader over the people of a clan of Midian. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:16</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">25:17</span> “Bring trouble to the Midianites, and destroy them, <span class="verse">25:18</span> because they bring trouble to you by their treachery with which they have deceived you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, who was killed on the day of the plague that happened as a result of Peor.” </p>

</body>
</html>