<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Sends a Plague against Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:1</span> An adversary opposed Israel, inciting David to count how many warriors Israel had. <span class="verse">21:2</span> David told Joab and the leaders of the army, “Go, count the number of warriors from Beer Sheba to Dan. Then bring back a report to me so I may know how many we have.” <span class="verse">21:3</span> Joab replied, “May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> make his army a hundred times larger! My master, O king, do not all of them serve my master? Why does my master want to do this? Why bring judgment on Israel?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:4</span> But the king’s edict stood, despite Joab’s objections. So Joab left and traveled throughout Israel before returning to Jerusalem. <span class="verse">21:5</span> Joab reported to David the number of warriors. In all Israel there were 1,100,000 sword-wielding soldiers; Judah alone had 470,000 sword-wielding soldiers. <span class="verse">21:6</span> Now Joab did not number Levi and Benjamin, for the king’s edict disgusted him. <span class="verse">21:7</span> God was also offended by it, so he attacked Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:8</span> David said to God, “I have sinned greatly by doing this! Now, please remove the guilt of your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.” <span class="verse">21:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told Gad, David’s prophet, <span class="verse">21:10</span> “Go, tell David, ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: “I am offering you three forms of judgment from which to choose. Pick one of them.”’” <span class="verse">21:11</span> Gad went to David and told him, “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: ‘Pick one of these: <span class="verse">21:12</span> three years of famine, or three months being chased by your enemies and struck down by their swords, or three days being struck down by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, during which a plague will invade the land and the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will destroy throughout Israel’s territory.’ Now, decide what I should tell the one who sent me.” <span class="verse">21:13</span> David said to Gad, “I am very upset! I prefer to be attacked by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for his mercy is very great; I do not want to be attacked by men!” <span class="verse">21:14</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> sent a plague through Israel, and 70,000 Israelite men died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:15</span> God sent an angel to ravage Jerusalem. As he was doing so, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> watched and relented from his judgment. He told the angel who was destroying, “That’s enough! Stop now!” </p>
<p class="bodytext">Now the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was standing near the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. <span class="verse">21:16</span> David looked up and saw the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> standing between the earth and sky with his sword drawn and in his hand, stretched out over Jerusalem. David and the leaders, covered with sackcloth, threw themselves down with their faces to the ground. <span class="verse">21:17</span> David said to God, “Was I not the one who decided to number the army? I am the one who sinned and committed this awful deed! As for these sheep—what have they done? O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God, attack me and my family, but remove the plague from your people!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:18</span> So the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told Gad to instruct David to go up and build an altar for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. <span class="verse">21:19</span> So David went up as Gad instructed him to do in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">21:20</span> While Ornan was threshing wheat, he turned and saw the messenger, and he and his four sons hid themselves. <span class="verse">21:21</span> When David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David; he came out from the threshing floor and bowed to David with his face to the ground. <span class="verse">21:22</span> David said to Ornan, “Sell me the threshing floor so I can build on it an altar for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—I’ll pay top price —so that the plague may be removed from the people.” <span class="verse">21:23</span> Ornan told David, “You can have it! My master, the king, may do what he wants. Look, I am giving you the oxen for burnt sacrifices, the threshing sledges for wood, and the wheat for an offering. I give it all to you.” <span class="verse">21:24</span> King David replied to Ornan, “No, I insist on buying it for top price. I will not offer to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> what belongs to you or offer a burnt sacrifice that cost me nothing. <span class="verse">21:25</span> So David bought the place from Ornan for 600 pieces of gold. <span class="verse">21:26</span> David built there an altar to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings. He called out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> responded by sending fire from the sky and consuming the burnt sacrifice on the altar. <span class="verse">21:27</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> ordered the messenger to put his sword back into its sheath. </p>

</body>
</html>