<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Lamentations 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Lamentations<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">א</span> (<i>Alef</i>)</p><p class="paragraphtitle">The Prophet Speaks</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Alas! The Lord has covered</p>
<p class="poetry">Daughter Zion with his anger. </p>
<p class="poetry">He has thrown down the splendor of Israel</p>
<p class="poetry">from heaven to earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">he did not protect his temple </p>
<p class="poetry">when he displayed his anger. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ב</span> (<i>Bet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> The Lord destroyed mercilessly </p>
<p class="poetry">all the homes of Jacob’s descendants. </p>
<p class="poetry">In his anger he tore down</p>
<p class="poetry">the fortified cities of Daughter Judah.</p>
<p class="poetry">He knocked to the ground and humiliated</p>
<p class="poetry">the kingdom and its rulers. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ג</span> (<i>Gimel</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> In fierce anger he destroyed </p>
<p class="poetry">the whole army of Israel.</p>
<p class="poetry">He withdrew his right hand </p>
<p class="poetry">as the enemy attacked. </p>
<p class="poetry">He was like a raging fire in the land of Jacob; </p>
<p class="poetry">it consumed everything around it. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ד</span> (<i>Dalet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> He prepared his bow like an enemy;</p>
<p class="poetry">his right hand was ready to shoot. </p>
<p class="poetry">Like a foe he killed everyone,</p>
<p class="poetry">even our strong young men; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has poured out his anger like fire</p>
<p class="poetry">on the tent of Daughter Zion. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ה</span> (<i>He</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> The Lord, like an enemy,</p>
<p class="poetry">destroyed Israel.</p>
<p class="poetry">He destroyed all her palaces;</p>
<p class="poetry">he ruined her fortified cities.</p>
<p class="poetry">He made everyone in Daughter Judah</p>
<p class="poetry">mourn and lament. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ו</span> (<i>Vav</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> He destroyed his temple as if it were a vineyard; </p>
<p class="poetry">he destroyed his appointed meeting place.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has made those in Zion forget</p>
<p class="poetry">both the festivals and the Sabbaths. </p>
<p class="poetry">In his fierce anger he has spurned </p>
<p class="poetry">both king and priest. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ז</span> (<i>Zayin</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> The Lord rejected his altar</p>
<p class="poetry">and abhorred his temple. </p>
<p class="poetry">He handed over to the enemy </p>
<p class="poetry">Jerusalem’s palace walls;</p>
<p class="poetry">the enemy shouted in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple</p>
<p class="poetry">as if it were a feast day. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ח</span> (<i>Khet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was determined to tear down</p>
<p class="poetry">Daughter Zion’s wall.</p>
<p class="poetry">He prepared to knock it down; </p>
<p class="poetry">he did not withdraw his hand from destroying. </p>
<p class="poetry">He made the ramparts and fortified walls lament;</p>
<p class="poetry">together they mourned their ruin. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ט</span> (<i>Tet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Her city gates have fallen to the ground;</p>
<p class="poetry">he smashed to bits the bars that lock her gates. </p>
<p class="poetry">Her king and princes were taken into exile; </p>
<p class="poetry">there is no more guidance available. </p>
<p class="poetry">As for her prophets, </p>
<p class="poetry">they no longer receive a vision from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">י</span> (<i>Yod</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> The elders of Daughter Zion</p>
<p class="poetry">sit on the ground in silence. </p>
<p class="poetry">They have thrown dirt on their heads;</p>
<p class="poetry">They have dressed in sackcloth. </p>
<p class="poetry">Jerusalem’s young women stare down at the ground. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">כ</span> (<i>Kaf</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> My eyes are worn out from weeping; </p>
<p class="poetry">my stomach is in knots. </p>
<p class="poetry">My heart is poured out on the ground</p>
<p class="poetry">due to the destruction of my helpless people; </p>
<p class="poetry">children and infants faint</p>
<p class="poetry">in the town squares. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ל</span> (<i>Lamed</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> Children say to their mothers, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Where are food and drink?” </p>
<p class="poetry">They faint like a wounded warrior</p>
<p class="poetry">in the city squares.</p>
<p class="poetry">They die slowly </p>
<p class="poetry">in their mothers’ arms. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">מ</span> (<i>Mem</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> With what can I equate you?</p>
<p class="poetry">To what can I compare you, O Daughter Jerusalem?</p>
<p class="poetry">To what can I liken you </p>
<p class="poetry">so that I might comfort you, O Virgin Daughter Zion?</p>
<p class="poetry">Your wound is as deep as the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry">Who can heal you? </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">נ</span> (<i>Nun</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> Your prophets saw visions for you</p>
<p class="poetry">that were worthless whitewash. </p>
<p class="poetry">They failed to expose your sin</p>
<p class="poetry">so as to restore your fortunes. </p>
<p class="poetry">They saw oracles for you</p>
<p class="poetry">that were worthless lies. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ס</span> (<i>Samek</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> All who passed by on the road</p>
<p class="poetry">clapped their hands to mock you. </p>
<p class="poetry">They sneered and shook their heads</p>
<p class="poetry">at Daughter Jerusalem.</p>
<p class="poetry">“Ha! Is this the city they called </p>
<p class="poetry">‘the perfection of beauty, </p>
<p class="poetry">the source of joy of the whole earth!’?” </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">פ</span> (<i>Pe</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> All your enemies</p>
<p class="poetry">gloated over you. </p>
<p class="poetry">They sneered and gnashed their teeth;</p>
<p class="poetry">they said, “We have destroyed her!</p>
<p class="poetry">Ha! We have waited a long time for this day.</p>
<p class="poetry">We have lived to see it!” </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ע</span> (<i>Ayin</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:17</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has done what he planned;</p>
<p class="poetry">he has fulfilled his promise </p>
<p class="poetry">that he threatened long ago: </p>
<p class="poetry">He has overthrown you without mercy </p>
<p class="poetry">and has enabled the enemy to gloat over you;</p>
<p class="poetry">he has exalted your adversaries’ power. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><b><span class="hebrew">צ</span></b> (<i>Tsade</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:18</span> Cry out from your heart to the Lord, </p>
<p class="poetry">O wall of Daughter Zion! </p>
<p class="poetry">Make your tears flow like a river</p>
<p class="poetry">all day and all night long! </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not rest;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not let your tears stop!</p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ק</span> (<i>Qof</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:19</span> Get up! Cry out in the night </p>
<p class="poetry">when the night watches start! </p>
<p class="poetry">Pour out your heart like water</p>
<p class="poetry">before the face of the Lord! </p>
<p class="poetry">Lift up your hands to him</p>
<p class="poetry">for your children’s lives; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are fainting from hunger </p>
<p class="poetry">at every street corner. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ר</span> (<i>Resh</i>)</p><p class="paragraphtitle">Jerusalem Speaks</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:20</span> Look, O <span class="smcaps">Lord!</span> Consider! </p>
<p class="poetry">Whom have you ever afflicted like this?</p>
<p class="poetry">Should women eat their offspring, </p>
<p class="poetry">their healthy infants? </p>
<p class="poetry">Should priest and prophet </p>
<p class="poetry">be killed in the Lord’s sanctuary?</p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ש</span> (<i>Sin/Shin</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:21</span> The young boys and old men</p>
<p class="poetry">lie dead on the ground in the streets. </p>
<p class="poetry">My young women and my young men</p>
<p class="poetry">have fallen by the sword.</p>
<p class="poetry">You killed them when you were angry; </p>
<p class="poetry">you slaughtered them without mercy. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ת</span> (<i>Tav</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:22</span> As if it were a feast day, you call </p>
<p class="poetry">enemies to terrify me on every side. </p>
<p class="poetry">On the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s anger</p>
<p class="poetry">no one escaped or survived.</p>
<p class="poetry">My enemy has finished off</p>
<p class="poetry">those healthy infants whom I bore and raised. </p>

</body>
</html>