<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Mark 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Brought Before Pilate </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> Early in the morning, after forming a plan, the chief priests with the elders and the experts in the law and the whole Sanhedrin tied Jesus up, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate. <span class="verse">15:2</span> So Pilate asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He replied, “You say so.” <span class="verse">15:3</span> Then the chief priests began to accuse him repeatedly. <span class="verse">15:4</span> So Pilate asked him again, “Have you nothing to say? See how many charges they are bringing against you!” <span class="verse">15:5</span> But Jesus made no further reply, so that Pilate was amazed. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus and Barabbas </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:6</span> During the feast it was customary to release one prisoner to the people, whomever they requested. <span class="verse">15:7</span> A man named Barabbas was imprisoned with rebels who had committed murder during an insurrection. <span class="verse">15:8</span> Then the crowd came up and began to ask Pilate to release a prisoner for them, as was his custom. <span class="verse">15:9</span> So Pilate asked them, “Do you want me to release the king of the Jews for you?” <span class="verse">15:10</span> (For he knew that the chief priests had handed him over because of envy.) <span class="verse">15:11</span> But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas instead. <span class="verse">15:12</span> So Pilate spoke to them again, “Then what do you want me to do with the one you call king of the Jews?” <span class="verse">15:13</span> They shouted back, “Crucify him!” <span class="verse">15:14</span> Pilate asked them, “Why? What has he done wrong?” But they shouted more insistently, “Crucify him!” <span class="verse">15:15</span> Because he wanted to satisfy the crowd, Pilate released Barabbas for them. Then, after he had Jesus flogged, he handed him over to be crucified. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus is Mocked</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:16</span> So the soldiers led him into the palace (that is, the governor’s residence) and called together the whole cohort. <span class="verse">15:17</span> They put a purple cloak on him and after braiding a crown of thorns, they put it on him. <span class="verse">15:18</span> They began to salute him: “Hail, king of the Jews!” <span class="verse">15:19</span> Again and again they struck him on the head with a staff and spit on him. Then they knelt down and paid homage to him. <span class="verse">15:20</span> When<sup></sup> they had finished mocking him, they stripped him of the purple cloak and put his own clothes back on him. Then they led him away to crucify him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Crucifixion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:21</span> The soldiers forced a passerby to carry his cross, Simon of Cyrene, who was coming in from the country (he was the father of Alexander and Rufus). <span class="verse">15:22</span> They brought Jesus to a place called Golgotha (which is translated, “Place of the Skull”). <span class="verse">15:23</span> They offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it. <span class="verse">15:24</span> Then they crucified him and <i>divided</i> <i>his clothes, throwing dice</i> for them, to decide what each would take. <span class="verse">15:25</span> It was nine o’clock in the morning when they crucified him. <span class="verse">15:26</span> The inscription of the charge against him read, “The king of the Jews.” <span class="verse">15:27</span> And they crucified two outlaws with him, one on his right and one on his left. <span class="verse">15:29</span> Those who passed by defamed him, shaking their heads and saying, “Aha! You who can destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, <span class="verse">15:30</span> save yourself and come down from the cross!” <span class="verse">15:31</span> In the same way even the chief priests—together with the experts in the law —were mocking him among themselves: “He saved others, but he cannot save himself! <span class="verse">15:32</span> Let the Christ, the king of Israel, come down from the cross now, that we may see and believe!” Those who were crucified with him also spoke abusively to him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Death </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:33</span> Now when it was noon, darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon. <span class="verse">15:34</span> Around three o’clock Jesus cried out with a loud voice, “<i>Eloi</i><i>, Eloi, lema sabachthani?</i>” which means, “<b><i>My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?</i></b>” <span class="verse">15:35</span> When some of the bystanders heard it they said, “Listen, he is calling for Elijah!” <span class="verse">15:36</span> Then someone ran, filled a sponge with sour wine, put it on a stick, and gave it to him to drink, saying, “Leave him alone! Let’s see if Elijah will come to take him down!” <span class="verse">15:37</span> But Jesus cried out with a loud voice and breathed his last. <span class="verse">15:38</span> And the temple curtain was torn in two, from top to bottom. <span class="verse">15:39</span> Now when the centurion, who stood in front of him, saw how he died, he said, “Truly this man was God’s Son!” <span class="verse">15:40</span> There were also women, watching from a distance. Among them were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome. <span class="verse">15:41</span> When he was in Galilee, they had followed him and given him support. Many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem were there too.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Burial </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:42</span> Now when evening had already come, since it was the day of preparation (that is, the day before the Sabbath), <span class="verse">15:43</span> Joseph of Arimathea, a highly regarded member of the council, who was himself looking forward to the kingdom of God, went boldly to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. <span class="verse">15:44</span> Pilate was surprised that he was already dead. He called the centurion and asked him if he had been dead for some time. <span class="verse">15:45</span> When Pilate was informed by the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. <span class="verse">15:46</span> After Joseph bought a linen cloth and took down the body, he wrapped it in the linen and placed it in a tomb cut out of the rock. Then he rolled a stone across the entrance of the tomb. <span class="verse">15:47</span> Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where the body was placed. </p>

</body>
</html>