<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Time for All Events in Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> For everything there is an appointed time, </p>
<p class="poetry">and an appropriate time for every activity on earth: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> A time to be born, and a time to die; </p>
<p class="poetry">a time to plant, and a time to uproot what was planted; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> a time to kill, and a time to heal;</p>
<p class="poetry">a time to break down, and a time to build up;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> a time to weep, and a time to laugh;</p>
<p class="poetry">a time to mourn, and a time to dance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> A time to throw away stones, and a time to gather stones;</p>
<p class="poetry">a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> a time to search, and a time to give something up as lost; </p>
<p class="poetry">a time to keep, and a time to throw away; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> a time to rip, and a time to sew;</p>
<p class="poetry">a time to keep silent, and a time to speak. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> A time to love, and a time to hate;</p>
<p class="poetry">a time for war, and a time for peace. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Man is Ignorant of God’s Timing</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> What benefit can a worker gain from his toil? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> I have observed the burden</p>
<p class="poetry">that God has given to people to keep them occupied. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> God has made everything fit beautifully in its appropriate time,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he has also placed ignorance in the human heart </p>
<p class="poetry">so that people cannot discover what God has ordained, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the beginning to the end of their lives. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Enjoy Life in the Present</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> I have concluded that there is nothing better for people </p>
<p class="poetry">than to be happy and to enjoy </p>
<p class="poetry">themselves as long as they live, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> and also that everyone should eat and drink, and find enjoyment in all his toil,</p>
<p class="poetry">for these things are a gift from God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Sovereignty</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> I also know that whatever God does will endure forever;</p>
<p class="poetry">nothing can be added to it, and nothing taken away from it.</p>
<p class="poetry">God has made it this way, so that men will fear him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> Whatever exists now has already been, and whatever will be has already been;</p>
<p class="poetry">for God will seek to do again what has occurred in the past. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Problem of Injustice and Oppression</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> I saw something else on earth: </p>
<p class="poetry">In the place of justice, there was wickedness,</p>
<p class="poetry">and in the place of fairness, there was wickedness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> I thought to myself, “God will judge both the righteous and the wicked;</p>
<p class="poetry">for there is an appropriate time for every activity,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there is a time of judgment for every deed.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> I also thought to myself, “It is for the sake of people, </p>
<p class="poetry">so God can clearly show them that they are like animals. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> For the fate of humans and the fate of animals are the same:</p>
<p class="poetry">As one dies, so dies the other; both have the same breath.</p>
<p class="poetry">There is no advantage for humans over animals,</p>
<p class="poetry">for both are fleeting. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:20</span> Both go to the same place,</p>
<p class="poetry">both come from the dust,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to dust both return. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:21</span> Who really knows if the human spirit ascends upward,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the animal’s spirit descends into the earth?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:22</span> So I perceived there is nothing better than for people to enjoy their work, </p>
<p class="poetry">because that is their reward;</p>
<p class="poetry">for who can show them what the future holds? </p>

</body>
</html>