<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Colossians 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Colossians<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Households</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:18</span> Wives, submit to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. <span class="verse">3:19</span> Husbands, love your wives and do not be embittered against them. <span class="verse">3:20</span> Children, obey your parents in everything, for this is pleasing in the Lord. <span class="verse">3:21</span> Fathers, do not provoke your children, so they will not become disheartened. <span class="verse">3:22</span> Slaves, obey your earthly masters in every respect, not only when they are watching—like those who are strictly people-pleasers—but with a sincere heart, fearing the Lord. <span class="verse">3:23</span> Whatever you are doing, work at it with enthusiasm, as to the Lord and not for people, <span class="verse">3:24</span> because you know that you will receive your inheritance from the Lord as the reward. Serve the Lord Christ. <span class="verse">3:25</span> For the one who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there are no exceptions. <span class="verse">4:1</span> Masters, treat your slaves with justice and fairness, because you know that you also have a master in heaven.</p>
<p class="bodytext"></p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Pray for the Success of Paul’s Mission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:2</span> Be devoted to prayer, keeping alert in it with thanksgiving. <span class="verse">4:3</span> At the same time pray for us too, that God may open a door for the message so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ, for which I am in chains. <span class="verse">4:4</span> Pray that I may make it known as I should. <span class="verse">4:5</span> Conduct yourselves with wisdom toward outsiders, making the most of the opportunities. <span class="verse">4:6</span> Let your speech always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you should answer everyone. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Personal Greetings and Instructions</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:7</span> Tychicus, a dear brother, faithful minister, and fellow slave in the Lord, will tell you all the news about me. <span class="verse">4:8</span> I sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are doing and that he may encourage your hearts. <span class="verse">4:9</span> I sent him with Onesimus, the faithful and dear brother, who is one of you. They will tell you about everything here. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:10</span> Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, sends you greetings, as does Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom you received instructions; if he comes to you, welcome him). <span class="verse">4:11</span> And Jesus who is called Justus also sends greetings. In terms of Jewish converts, these are the only fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me. <span class="verse">4:12</span> Epaphras, who is one of you and a slave of Christ, greets you. He is always struggling in prayer on your behalf, so that you may stand mature and fully assured in all the will of God. <span class="verse">4:13</span> For I can testify that he has worked hard for you and for those in Laodicea and Hierapolis. <span class="verse">4:14</span> Our dear friend Luke the physician and Demas greet you. <span class="verse">4:15</span> Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters who are in Laodicea and to Nympha and the church that meets in her house. <span class="verse">4:16</span> And after you have read this letter, have it read to the church of Laodicea. In turn, read the letter from Laodicea as well. <span class="verse">4:17</span> And tell Archippus, “See to it that you complete the ministry you received in the Lord.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:18</span> I, Paul, write this greeting by my own hand. Remember my chains. Grace be with you. </p>

</body>
</html>