<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 94</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 94</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God who avenges!</p>
<p class="poetry">O God who avenges, reveal your splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:2</span> Rise up, O judge of the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay back the proud. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:3</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, how long will the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">how long will the wicked celebrate? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:4</span> They spew out threats and speak defiantly;</p>
<p class="poetry">all the evildoers boast. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:5</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, they crush your people;</p>
<p class="poetry">they oppress the nation that belongs to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:6</span> They kill the widow and the resident foreigner,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they murder the fatherless. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:7</span> Then they say, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does not see this;</p>
<p class="poetry">the God of Jacob does not take notice of it.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:8</span> Take notice of this, you ignorant people. </p>
<p class="poetry">You fools, when will you ever understand? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:9</span> Does the one who makes the human ear not hear?</p>
<p class="poetry">Does the one who forms the human eye not see? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:10</span> Does the one who disciplines the nations not punish?</p>
<p class="poetry">He is the one who imparts knowledge to human beings!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> knows that peoples’ thoughts </p>
<p class="poetry">are morally bankrupt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:12</span> How blessed<sup></sup> is the one whom you instruct, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one whom you teach from your law, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:13</span> in order to protect him from times of trouble, </p>
<p class="poetry">until the wicked are destroyed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:14</span> Certainly the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does not forsake his people;</p>
<p class="poetry">he does not abandon the nation that belongs to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:15</span> For justice will prevail, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all the morally upright will be vindicated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:16</span> Who will rise up to defend me against the wicked?</p>
<p class="poetry">Who will stand up for me against the evildoers? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:17</span> If the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had not helped me,</p>
<p class="poetry">I would soon have dwelt in the silence of death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:18</span> If I say, “My foot is slipping,”</p>
<p class="poetry">your loyal love, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, supports me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:19</span> When worries threaten to overwhelm me, </p>
<p class="poetry">your soothing touch makes me happy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:20</span> Cruel rulers are not your allies,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who make oppressive laws. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:21</span> They conspire against the blameless, </p>
<p class="poetry">and condemn to death the innocent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:22</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will protect me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my God will shelter me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">94:23</span> He will pay them back for their sin. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will destroy them because of their evil;</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God will destroy them. </p>

</body>
</html>