<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 30</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 30</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Words of Agur </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:1</span> The words of Agur, the son of Jakeh; an oracle: </p>
<p class="poetry">This man says to Ithiel, to Ithiel and to Ukal: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:2</span> Surely I am more brutish than any other human being, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I do not have human understanding; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:3</span> I have not learned wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor can I have knowledge of the Holy One. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:4</span> Who has ascended into heaven, and then descended? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who has gathered up the winds in his fists? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who has bound up the waters in his cloak? </p>
<p class="poetry">Who has established all the ends of the earth? </p>
<p class="poetry">What is his name, and what is his son’s name? Surely you can know! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:5</span> Every word of God is purified; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is like a shield for those who take refuge in him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:6</span> Do not add to his words,</p>
<p class="poetry">lest he reprove you, and prove you to be a liar. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:7</span> Two things I have asked from you; </p>
<p class="poetry">do not refuse me before I die: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:8</span> Remove falsehood and lies far from me;</p>
<p class="poetry">do not give me poverty or riches,</p>
<p class="poetry">feed me with my allotted portion of bread, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:9</span> lest I become satisfied and act deceptively </p>
<p class="poetry">and say, “Who is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>?”</p>
<p class="poetry">Or lest I become poor and steal</p>
<p class="poetry">and demean the name of my God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:10</span> Do not slander a servant to his master,</p>
<p class="poetry">lest he curse you, and you are found guilty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:11</span> There is a generation who curse their fathers</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not bless their mothers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:12</span> There is a generation who are pure in their own opinion</p>
<p class="poetry">and yet are not washed from their filthiness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:13</span> There is a generation whose eyes are so lofty, </p>
<p class="poetry">and whose eyelids are lifted up disdainfully. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:14</span> There is a generation whose teeth are like swords </p>
<p class="poetry">and whose molars are like knives</p>
<p class="poetry">to devour the poor from the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">and the needy from among the human race.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:15</span> The leech has two daughters: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Give! Give!” </p>
<p class="poetry">There are three things that will never be satisfied,</p>
<p class="poetry">four that have never said, “Enough” —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:16</span> the grave, the barren womb; </p>
<p class="poetry">earth has not been satisfied with water;</p>
<p class="poetry">and fire has never said, “Enough!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:17</span> The eye that mocks at a father</p>
<p class="poetry">and despises obeying a mother—</p>
<p class="poetry">the ravens of the valley will peck it out</p>
<p class="poetry">and the young vultures will eat it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:18</span> There are three things that are too wonderful for me, </p>
<p class="poetry">four that I do not understand: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:19</span> the way of an eagle in the sky,</p>
<p class="poetry">the way of a snake on a rock,</p>
<p class="poetry">the way of a ship in the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the way of a man with a woman. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:20</span> This is the way of an adulterous woman:</p>
<p class="poetry">she has eaten and wiped her mouth </p>
<p class="poetry">and has said, “I have not done wrong.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:21</span> Under three things the earth has trembled, </p>
<p class="poetry">and under four things it cannot bear up:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:22</span> under a servant who becomes king,</p>
<p class="poetry">under a fool who becomes stuffed with food, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:23</span> under an unloved woman who becomes married,</p>
<p class="poetry">and under a female servant who dispossesses her mistress. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:24</span> There are four things on earth that are small, </p>
<p class="poetry">but they are exceedingly wise: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:25</span> ants are creatures with little strength,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they prepare their food in the summer; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:26</span> rock badgers are creatures with little power,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they make their homes in the crags; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:27</span> locusts have no king,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they all go forward by ranks; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:28</span> a lizard you can catch with the hand,</p>
<p class="poetry">but it gets into the palaces of the king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:29</span> There are three things that are magnificent in their step,</p>
<p class="poetry">four things that move about magnificently: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:30</span> a lion, mightiest of the beasts,</p>
<p class="poetry">who does not retreat from anything; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:31</span> a strutting rooster, a male goat,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a king with his army around him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:32</span> If you have done foolishly by exalting yourself </p>
<p class="poetry">or if you have planned evil,</p>
<p class="poetry">put your hand over your mouth! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:33</span> For as the churning of milk produces butter</p>
<p class="poetry">and as punching the nose produces blood,</p>
<p class="poetry">so stirring up anger produces strife. </p>

</body>
</html>