<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 81</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 81</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>gittith</i> style; by Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:1</span> Shout for joy to God, our source of strength!</p>
<p class="poetry">Shout out to the God of Jacob! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:2</span> Sing a song and play the tambourine,</p>
<p class="poetry">the pleasant-sounding harp, and the ten-stringed instrument. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:3</span> Sound the ram’s horn on the day of the new moon, </p>
<p class="poetry">and on the day of the full moon when our festival begins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:4</span> For observing the festival is a requirement for Israel; </p>
<p class="poetry">it is an ordinance given by the God of Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:5</span> He decreed it as a regulation in Joseph,</p>
<p class="poetry">when he attacked the land of Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetry">I heard a voice I did not recognize. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:6</span> It said: “I removed the burden from his shoulder;</p>
<p class="poetry">his hands were released from holding the basket. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:7</span> In your distress you called out and I rescued you.</p>
<p class="poetry">I answered you from a dark thundercloud. </p>
<p class="poetry">I tested you at the waters of Meribah. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:8</span> I said, ‘Listen, my people!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will warn you.</p>
<p class="poetry">O Israel, if only you would obey me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:9</span> There must be no other god among you.</p>
<p class="poetry">You must not worship a foreign god. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:10</span> I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who brought you out of the land of Egypt.</p>
<p class="poetry">Open your mouth wide and I will fill it.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:11</span> But my people did not obey me; </p>
<p class="poetry">Israel did not submit to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:12</span> I gave them over to their stubborn desires; </p>
<p class="poetry">they did what seemed right to them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:13</span> If only my people would obey me! </p>
<p class="poetry">If only Israel would keep my commands! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:14</span> Then I would quickly subdue their enemies,</p>
<p class="poetry">and attack their adversaries.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:15</span> (May those who hate the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> cower in fear before him.</p>
<p class="poetry">May they be permanently humiliated.) </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">81:16</span> “I would feed Israel the best wheat, </p>
<p class="poetry">and would satisfy your appetite with honey from the rocky cliffs.” </p>

</body>
</html>