<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:1</span> The intentions of the heart belong to a man,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the answer of the tongue comes from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:2</span> All a person’s ways seem right in his own opinion, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> evaluates the motives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:3</span> Commit your works to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your plans will be established. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has worked everything for his own ends —</p>
<p class="poetry">even the wicked for the day of disaster. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors every arrogant person; </p>
<p class="poetry">rest assured that they will not go unpunished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:6</span> Through loyal love and truth iniquity is appeased; </p>
<p class="poetry">through fearing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> one avoids evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:7</span> When a person’s ways are pleasing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">he even reconciles his enemies to himself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:8</span> Better to have a little with righteousness </p>
<p class="poetry">than to have abundant income without justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:9</span> A person plans his course, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> directs his steps. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:10</span> The divine verdict is in the words of the king,</p>
<p class="poetry">his pronouncements must not act treacherously against justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:11</span> Honest scales and balances are from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">all the weights in the bag are his handiwork. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:12</span> Doing wickedness is an abomination to kings,</p>
<p class="poetry">because a throne is established in righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:13</span> The delight of a king is righteous counsel, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he will love the one who speaks uprightly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:14</span> A king’s wrath is like a messenger of death, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a wise person appeases it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:15</span> In the light of the king’s face there is life,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his favor is like the clouds of the spring rain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:16</span> How much better it is to acquire wisdom than gold;</p>
<p class="poetry">to acquire understanding is more desirable than silver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:17</span> The highway of the upright is to turn away from evil;</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who guards his way safeguards his life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:18</span> Pride goes before destruction,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a haughty spirit before a fall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:19</span> It is better to be lowly in spirit with the afflicted</p>
<p class="poetry">than to share the spoils with the proud. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:20</span> The one who deals wisely in a matter will find success, </p>
<p class="poetry">and blessed is the one who trusts in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:21</span> The one who is wise in heart is called discerning,</p>
<p class="poetry">and kind speech increases persuasiveness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:22</span> Insight is like a life-giving fountain to the one who possesses it,</p>
<p class="poetry">but folly leads to the discipline of fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:23</span> A wise person’s heart makes his speech wise </p>
<p class="poetry">and it adds persuasiveness to his words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:24</span> Pleasant words are like a honeycomb, </p>
<p class="poetry">sweet to the soul and healing to the bones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:25</span> There is a way that seems right to a person, </p>
<p class="poetry">but its end is the way that leads to death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:26</span> A laborer’s appetite has labored for him,</p>
<p class="poetry">for his hunger has pressed him to work. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:27</span> A wicked scoundrel digs up evil,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his slander is like a scorching fire. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:28</span> A perverse person spreads dissension,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a gossip separates the closest friends. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:29</span> A violent person entices his neighbor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and then leads him down a path that is terrible. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:30</span> The one who winks his eyes devises perverse things, </p>
<p class="poetry">and one who compresses his lips has accomplished evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:31</span> Gray hair is like a crown of glory; </p>
<p class="poetry">it is attained in the path of righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:32</span> Better to be slow to anger than to be a mighty warrior,</p>
<p class="poetry">and one who controls his temper is better than one who captures a city. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:33</span> The dice are thrown into the lap, </p>
<p class="poetry">but their every decision is from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>