<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judah’s Tribal Lands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> The following is a record of the territory assigned to the Israelites in the land of Canaan by Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the Israelite tribal leaders. <span class="verse">14:2</span> The land assignments to the nine-and-a-half tribes were made by drawing lots, as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had instructed Moses. <span class="verse">14:3</span> Now Moses had assigned land to the two-and-a-half tribes east of the Jordan, but he assigned no land to the Levites. <span class="verse">14:4</span> The descendants of Joseph were considered as two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. The Levites were allotted no territory, though they were assigned cities in which to live, along with the grazing areas for their cattle and possessions. <span class="verse">14:5</span> The Israelites followed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s instructions to Moses and divided up the land. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:6</span> The men of Judah approached Joshua in Gilgal, and Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, “You know what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said about you and me to Moses, the man of God, at Kadesh Barnea. <span class="verse">14:7</span> I was forty years old when Moses, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant, sent me from Kadesh Barnea to spy on the land and I brought back to him an honest report. <span class="verse">14:8</span> My countrymen who accompanied me frightened the people, but I remained loyal to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God. <span class="verse">14:9</span> That day Moses made this solemn promise: ‘Surely the land on which you walked will belong to you and your descendants permanently, for you remained loyal to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God.’ <span class="verse">14:10</span> So now, look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has preserved my life, just as he promised, these past forty-five years since the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke these words to Moses, while Israel traveled through the wilderness. See here, I am today eighty-five years old! <span class="verse">14:11</span> Today I am still as strong as when Moses sent me out. I can fight and go about my daily activities with the same energy I had then. <span class="verse">14:12</span> Now, assign me this hill country that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> promised me at that time! No doubt you heard then that the Anakites live there in large, fortified cities. But assuming the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is with me, I will conquer them, as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> promised.” <span class="verse">14:13</span> Joshua asked God to empower Caleb son of Jephunneh and assigned him Hebron. <span class="verse">14:14</span> So Hebron remains the assigned land of Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this very day because he remained loyal to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel. <span class="verse">14:15</span> (Hebron used to be called Kiriath Arba. Arba was a famous Anakite.) Then the land was free of war. </p>

</body>
</html>