<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Acts 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Acts<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">James is Killed and Peter Imprisoned</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> About that time King Herod laid hands on some from the church to harm them. <span class="verse">12:2</span> He had James, the brother of John, executed with a sword. <span class="verse">12:3</span> When he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter too. (This took place during the feast of Unleavened Bread.) <span class="verse">12:4</span> When he had seized him, he put him in prison, handing him over to four squads of soldiers to guard him. Herod planned to bring him out for public trial after the Passover. <span class="verse">12:5</span> So Peter was kept in prison, but those in the church were earnestly praying to God for him. <span class="verse">12:6</span> On that very night before Herod was going to bring him out for trial, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, while guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison. <span class="verse">12:7</span> Suddenly an angel of the Lord appeared, and a light shone in the prison cell. He struck Peter on the side and woke him up, saying, “Get up quickly!” And the chains fell off Peter’s wrists. <span class="verse">12:8</span> The angel said to him, “Fasten your belt and put on your sandals.” Peter did so. Then the angel said to him, “Put on your cloak and follow me.” <span class="verse">12:9</span> Peter went out and followed him; he did not realize that what was happening through the angel was real, but thought he was seeing a vision. <span class="verse">12:10</span> After they had passed the first and second guards, they came to the iron gate leading into the city. It opened for them by itself, and they went outside and walked down one narrow street, when at once the angel left him. <span class="verse">12:11</span> When Peter came to himself, he said, “Now I know for certain that the Lord has sent his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and from everything the Jewish people were expecting to happen.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:12</span> When Peter realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John Mark, where many people had gathered together and were praying. <span class="verse">12:13</span> When he knocked at the door of the outer gate, a slave girl named Rhoda answered. <span class="verse">12:14</span> When she recognized Peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed she did not open the gate, but ran back in and told them that Peter was standing at the gate. <span class="verse">12:15</span> But they said to her, “You’ve lost your mind!” But she kept insisting that it was Peter, and they kept saying, “It is his angel!” <span class="verse">12:16</span> Now Peter continued knocking, and when they opened the door and saw him, they were greatly astonished. <span class="verse">12:17</span> He motioned to them with his hand to be quiet and then related how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. He said, “Tell James and the brothers these things,” and then he left and went to another place. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:18</span> At daybreak there was great consternation among the soldiers over what had become of Peter. <span class="verse">12:19</span> When Herod had searched for him and did not find him, he questioned the guards and commanded that they be led away to execution. Then Herod went down from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:20</span> Now Herod was having an angry quarrel with the people of Tyre and Sidon. So they joined together and presented themselves before him. And after convincing Blastus, the king’s personal assistant, to help them, they asked for peace, because their country’s food supply was provided by the king’s country. <span class="verse">12:21</span> On a day determined in advance, Herod put on his royal robes, sat down on the judgment seat, and made a speech to them. <span class="verse">12:22</span> But the crowd began to shout, “The voice of a god, and not of a man!” <span class="verse">12:23</span> Immediately an angel of the Lord struck Herod down because he did not give the glory to God, and he was eaten by worms and died. <span class="verse">12:24</span> But the word of God kept on increasing and multiplying. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:25</span> So Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem when they had completed their mission, bringing along with them John Mark. </p>

</body>
</html>