<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Revelation 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Revelation<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Great Prostitute and the Beast</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke to me. “Come,” he said, “I will show you the condemnation and punishment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters, <span class="verse">17:2</span> with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality and the earth’s inhabitants got drunk with the wine of her immorality.” <span class="verse">17:3</span> So he carried me away in the Spirit to a wilderness, and there I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that was full of blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns. <span class="verse">17:4</span> Now the woman was dressed in purple and scarlet clothing, and adorned with gold, precious stones, and pearls. She held in her hand a golden cup filled with detestable things and unclean things from her sexual immorality. <span class="verse">17:5</span> On her forehead was written a name, a mystery: “Babylon the Great, the Mother of prostitutes and of the detestable things of the earth.” <span class="verse">17:6</span> I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the saints and the blood of those who testified to Jesus. I was greatly astounded when I saw her. <span class="verse">17:7</span> But the angel said to me, “Why are you astounded? I will interpret for you the mystery of the woman and of the beast with the seven heads and ten horns that carries her. <span class="verse">17:8</span> The beast you saw was, and is not, but is about to come up from the abyss and then go to destruction. The inhabitants of the earth—all those whose names have not been written in the book of life since the foundation of the world—will be astounded when they see that the beast was, and is not, but is to come. <span class="verse">17:9</span> (This requires a mind that has wisdom.) The seven heads are seven mountains the woman sits on. They are also seven kings: <span class="verse">17:10</span> five have fallen; one is, and the other has not yet come, but whenever he does come, he must remain for only a brief time. <span class="verse">17:11</span> The beast that was, and is not, is himself an eighth king and yet is one of the seven, and is going to destruction. <span class="verse">17:12</span> The ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but will receive ruling authority as kings with the beast for one hour. <span class="verse">17:13</span> These kings have a single intent, and they will give their power and authority to the beast. <span class="verse">17:14</span> They will make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb will conquer them, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, and those accompanying the Lamb are the called, chosen, and faithful.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:15</span> Then the angel said to me, “The waters you saw (where the prostitute is seated) are peoples, multitudes, nations, and languages. <span class="verse">17:16</span> The ten horns that you saw, and the beast—these will hate the prostitute and make her desolate and naked. They will consume her flesh and burn her up with fire. <span class="verse">17:17</span> For God has put into their minds to carry out his purpose by making a decision to give their royal power to the beast until the words of God are fulfilled. <span class="verse">17:18</span> As for the woman you saw, she is the great city that has sovereignty over the kings of the earth.” </p>

</body>
</html>