<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Death of Abraham</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span> Abraham had taken another wife, named Keturah. <span class="verse">25:2</span> She bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. <span class="verse">25:3</span> Jokshan became the father of Sheba and Dedan. The descendants of Dedan were the Asshurites, Letushites, and Leummites. <span class="verse">25:4</span> The sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were descendants of Keturah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:5</span> Everything he owned Abraham left to his son Isaac. <span class="verse">25:6</span> But while he was still alive, Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his concubines and sent them off to the east, away from his son Isaac. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:7</span> Abraham lived a total of 175 years. <span class="verse">25:8</span> Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, an old man who had lived a full life. He joined his ancestors. <span class="verse">25:9</span> His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah near Mamre, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar, the Hittite. <span class="verse">25:10</span> This was the field Abraham had purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried with his wife Sarah. <span class="verse">25:11</span> After Abraham’s death, God blessed his son Isaac. Isaac lived near Beer Lahai Roi. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Sons of Ishmael</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:12</span> This is the account of Abraham’s son Ishmael, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s servant, bore to Abraham. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:13</span> These are the names of Ishmael’s sons, by their names according to their records: Nebaioth (Ishmael’s firstborn), Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, <span class="verse">25:14</span> Mishma, Dumah, Massa, <span class="verse">25:15</span> Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. <span class="verse">25:16</span> These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names by their settlements and their camps—twelve princes according to their clans. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:17</span> Ishmael lived a total of 137 years. He breathed his last and died; then he joined his ancestors. <span class="verse">25:18</span> His descendants settled from Havilah to Shur, which runs next to Egypt all the way to Asshur. They settled away from all their relatives. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jacob and Esau</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:19</span> This is the account of Isaac, the son of Abraham.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Abraham became the father of Isaac. <span class="verse">25:20</span> When Isaac was forty years old, he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan Aram and sister of Laban the Aramean. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:21</span> Isaac prayed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> on behalf of his wife because she was childless. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> answered his prayer, and his wife Rebekah became pregnant. <span class="verse">25:22</span> But the children struggled inside her, and she said, “Why is this happening to me?” So she asked the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, <span class="verse">25:23</span> and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to her,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Two nations are in your womb, </p>
<p class="poetry">and two peoples will be separated from within you.</p>
<p class="poetry">One people will be stronger than the other,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the older will serve the younger.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:24</span> When the time came for Rebekah to give birth, there were twins in her womb. <span class="verse">25:25</span> The first came out reddish all over, like a hairy garment, so they named him Esau. <span class="verse">25:26</span> When his brother came out with his hand clutching Esau’s heel, they named him Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old when they were born. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:27</span> When the boys grew up, Esau became a skilled hunter, a man of the open fields, but Jacob was an even-tempered man, living in tents. <span class="verse">25:28</span> Isaac loved Esau because he had a taste for fresh game, but Rebekah loved Jacob. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:29</span> Now Jacob cooked some stew, and when Esau came in from the open fields, he was famished. <span class="verse">25:30</span> So Esau said to Jacob, “Feed me some of the red stuff—yes, this red stuff—because I’m starving!” (That is why he was also called Edom.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:31</span> But Jacob replied, “First sell me your birthright.” <span class="verse">25:32</span> “Look,” said Esau, “I’m about to die! What use is the birthright to me?” <span class="verse">25:33</span> But Jacob said, “Swear an oath to me now.” So Esau swore an oath to him and sold his birthright to Jacob. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:34</span> Then Jacob gave Esau some bread and lentil stew; Esau ate and drank, then got up and went out. So Esau despised his birthright. </p>

</body>
</html>