<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Revelation 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Revelation<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Woman, the Child, and the Dragon</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> Then a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and with the moon under her feet, and on her head was a crown of twelve stars. <span class="verse">12:2</span> She was pregnant and was screaming in labor pains, struggling to give birth. <span class="verse">12:3</span> Then another sign appeared in heaven: a huge red dragon that had seven heads and ten horns, and on its heads were seven diadem crowns. <span class="verse">12:4</span> Now the dragon’s tail swept away a third of the stars in heaven and hurled them to the earth. Then the dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that he might devour her child as soon as it was born. <span class="verse">12:5</span> So the woman gave birth to a son, a male child, who is going <i>to rule</i> <i>over all the nations</i> <i>with</i> <i>an iron rod</i>. Her child was suddenly caught up to God and to his throne, <span class="verse">12:6</span> and she fled into the wilderness where a place had been prepared for her  by God, so she could be taken care of for 1,260 days.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">War in Heaven</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:7</span> Then war broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought back. <span class="verse">12:8</span> But the dragon was not strong enough to prevail, so there was no longer any place left in heaven for him and his angels. <span class="verse">12:9</span> So that huge dragon—the ancient serpent, the one called the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole world—was thrown down to the earth, and his angels along with him. <span class="verse">12:10</span> Then I heard a loud voice in heaven saying,</p>
<p class="poetry">“The salvation and the power</p>
<p class="poetry">and the kingdom of our God, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the ruling authority of his Christ, have now come, </p>
<p class="poetry">because the accuser of our brothers and sisters, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who accuses them day and night before our God, </p>
<p class="poetry">has been thrown down. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:11</span> But they overcame him </p>
<p class="poetry">by the blood of the Lamb</p>
<p class="poetry">and by the word of their testimony,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they did not love their lives so much that they were afraid to die. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:12</span> Therefore you heavens rejoice, and all who reside in them!</p>
<p class="poetry">But woe to the earth and the sea </p>
<p class="poetry">because the devil has come down to you! </p>
<p class="poetry">He is filled with terrible anger, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he knows that he only has a little time!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:13</span> Now when the dragon realized that he had been thrown down to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child. <span class="verse">12:14</span> But the woman was given the two wings of a giant eagle so that she could fly out into the wilderness, to the place God prepared for her, where she is taken care of—away from the presence of the serpent—for a time, times, and half a time. <span class="verse">12:15</span> Then the serpent spouted water like a river out of his mouth after the woman in an attempt to sweep her away by a flood, <span class="verse">12:16</span> but the earth came to her rescue; the ground opened up and swallowed the river that the dragon had spewed from his mouth. <span class="verse">12:17</span> So the dragon became enraged at the woman and went away to make war on the rest of her children, those who keep God’s commandments and hold to the testimony about Jesus. <span class="verse">12:18</span> And the dragon stood on the sand of the seashore. </p>

</body>
</html>