<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:1</span> Better is a dry crust of bread where there is quietness </p>
<p class="poetry">than a house full of feasting with strife. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:2</span> A servant who acts wisely will rule </p>
<p class="poetry">over an heir who behaves shamefully, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will share the inheritance along with the relatives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:3</span> The crucible is for refining silver and the furnace is for gold,</p>
<p class="poetry">likewise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> tests hearts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:4</span> One who acts wickedly pays attention to evil counsel; </p>
<p class="poetry">a liar listens to a malicious tongue. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:5</span> The one who mocks the poor has insulted his Creator;</p>
<p class="poetry">whoever rejoices over disaster will not go unpunished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:6</span> Grandchildren are like a crown to the elderly,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the glory of children is their parents. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:7</span> Excessive speech is not becoming for a fool; </p>
<p class="poetry">how much less are lies for a ruler! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:8</span> A bribe works like a charm for the one who offers it; </p>
<p class="poetry">in whatever he does he succeeds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:9</span> The one who forgives an offense seeks love,</p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever repeats a matter separates close friends. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:10</span> A rebuke makes a greater impression on a discerning person</p>
<p class="poetry">than a hundred blows on a fool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:11</span> An evil person seeks only rebellion, </p>
<p class="poetry">and so a cruel messenger will be sent against him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:12</span> It is better for a person to meet a mother bear being robbed of her cubs,</p>
<p class="poetry">than to encounter a fool in his folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:13</span> As for the one who repays evil for good,</p>
<p class="poetry">evil will not leave his house. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:14</span> Starting a quarrel is like letting out water; </p>
<p class="poetry">abandon strife before it breaks out! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:15</span> The one who acquits the guilty and the one who condemns the innocent —</p>
<p class="poetry">both of them are an abomination to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:16</span> What’s the point of a fool having money in hand</p>
<p class="poetry">to buy wisdom, when his head is empty? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:17</span> A friend loves at all times,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a relative is born to help in adversity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:18</span> The one who lacks sense strikes hands in pledge, </p>
<p class="poetry">and puts up financial security for his neighbor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:19</span> The one who loves a quarrel loves transgression; </p>
<p class="poetry">whoever builds his gate high seeks destruction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:20</span> The one who has a perverse heart does not find good, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who is deceitful in speech falls into trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:21</span> Whoever brings a fool into the world does so to his grief,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the father of a fool has no joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:22</span> A cheerful heart brings good healing, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a crushed spirit dries up the bones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:23</span> A wicked person receives a bribe secretly </p>
<p class="poetry">to pervert the ways of justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:24</span> Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the eyes of a fool run to the ends of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:25</span> A foolish child is a grief to his father,</p>
<p class="poetry">and bitterness to the mother who bore him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:26</span> It is terrible to punish a righteous person,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to flog honorable men is wrong. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:27</span> The truly wise person restrains his words,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who stays calm is discerning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:28</span> Even a fool who remains silent is considered wise,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who holds his tongue is deemed discerning. </p>

</body>
</html>