<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Covenant Lawsuit against the Nation Israel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message, you Israelites! </p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has a covenant lawsuit against the people of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry">For there is neither faithfulness nor loyalty in the land, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor do they acknowledge God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> There is only cursing, lying, murder, stealing, and adultery.</p>
<p class="poetry">They resort to violence and bloodshed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> Therefore the land will mourn, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all its inhabitants will perish. </p>
<p class="poetry">The wild animals, the birds of the sky, </p>
<p class="poetry">and even the fish in the sea will perish. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Dispute against the Sinful Priesthood</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Do not let anyone accuse or contend against anyone else: </p>
<p class="poetry">for my case is against you priests! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> You stumble day and night, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the false prophets stumble with you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have destroyed your own people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:6</span> You have destroyed my people </p>
<p class="poetry">by failing to acknowledge me! </p>
<p class="poetry">Because you refuse to acknowledge me, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will reject you as my priests.</p>
<p class="poetry">Because you reject the law of your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will reject your descendants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> The more the priests increased in numbers, </p>
<p class="poetry">the more they rebelled against me.</p>
<p class="poetry">They have turned their glorious calling </p>
<p class="poetry">into a shameful disgrace! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> They feed on the sin offerings of my people;</p>
<p class="poetry">their appetites long for their iniquity! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:9</span> I will deal with the people and priests together: </p>
<p class="poetry">I will punish them both for their ways, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will repay them for their deeds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:10</span> They will eat, but not be satisfied;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will engage in prostitution, but not increase in numbers;</p>
<p class="poetry">because they have abandoned the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">by pursuing other gods. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judgment of Pagan Idolatry and Cultic Prostitution</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Old and new wine </p>
<p class="poetry">take away the understanding of my people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> They consult their wooden idols, </p>
<p class="poetry">and their diviner’s staff answers with an oracle.</p>
<p class="poetry">The wind of prostitution blows them astray;</p>
<p class="poetry">they commit spiritual adultery against their God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:13</span> They sacrifice on the mountaintops </p>
<p class="poetry">and burn offerings on the hills;</p>
<p class="poetry">they sacrifice under oak, poplar, and terebinth,</p>
<p class="poetry">because their shade is so pleasant.</p>
<p class="poetry">As a result, your daughters have become cult prostitutes,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your daughters-in-law commit adultery! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:14</span> I will not punish your daughters when they commit prostitution,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the men consort with harlots, </p>
<p class="poetry">they sacrifice with temple prostitutes.</p>
<p class="poetry">It is true: “A people that lacks understanding will come to ruin!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warning to Judah: Do Not Join in Israel’s Apostasy</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:15</span> Although you, O Israel, commit adultery,</p>
<p class="poetry">do not let Judah become guilty!</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not journey to Gilgal. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not go up to Beth Aven. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not swear, “As surely as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lives!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:16</span> Israel has rebelled like a stubborn heifer!</p>
<p class="poetry">Soon the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will put them out to pasture</p>
<p class="poetry">like a lamb in a broad field. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:17</span> Ephraim has attached himself to idols;</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not go near him!</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Shameful Sinners Will Be Brought to Shame</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:18</span> They consume their alcohol, </p>
<p class="poetry">then engage in cult prostitution;</p>
<p class="poetry">they dearly love their shameful behavior.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:19</span> A whirlwind has wrapped them in its wings;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will be brought to shame because of their idolatrous worship. </p>

</body>
</html>