<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Object Lesson from Ruined Linen Shorts</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to me, “Go and buy some linen shorts and put them on. Do not put them in water.” <span class="verse">13:2</span> So I bought the shorts in keeping with the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s instructions and put them on. <span class="verse">13:3</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me again, <span class="verse">13:4</span> “Take the shorts that you bought and are wearing and go at once to Perath. Bury the shorts there in a crack in the rocks.” <span class="verse">13:5</span> So I went and buried them at Perath as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had ordered me to do. <span class="verse">13:6</span> Many days later the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to me, “Go at once to Perath and get the shorts I ordered you to bury there.” <span class="verse">13:7</span> So I went to Perath and dug up the shorts from the place where I had buried them. I found that they were ruined; they were good for nothing.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:8</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me, <span class="verse">13:9</span> “I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, say: ‘This shows how I will ruin the highly exalted position in which Judah and Jerusalem take pride. <span class="verse">13:10</span> These wicked people refuse to obey what I have said. They follow the stubborn inclinations of their own hearts and pay allegiance to other gods by worshiping and serving them. So they will become just like these linen shorts that are good for nothing. <span class="verse">13:11</span> For,’ I say, ‘just as shorts cling tightly to a person’s body, so I bound the whole nation of Israel and the whole nation of Judah tightly to me.’ I intended for them to be my special people and to bring me fame, honor, and praise. But they would not obey me.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:12</span> “So tell them, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of Israel, says: “Every wine jar is made to be filled with wine.”’ And they will probably say to you, ‘Do you not think we know that every wine jar is supposed to be filled with wine?’ <span class="verse">13:13</span> Then tell them, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: “I will soon fill all the people who live in this land with stupor. I will also fill the kings from David’s dynasty, the priests, the prophets, and the citizens of Jerusalem with stupor. <span class="verse">13:14</span> And I will smash them like wine bottles against one another, children and parents alike. I will not show any pity, mercy, or compassion. Nothing will keep me from destroying them,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:15</span> Then I said to the people of Judah: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Listen and pay attention! Do not be arrogant!</p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:16</span> Show the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God the respect that is due him. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do it before he brings the darkness of disaster. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do it before you stumble into distress</p>
<p class="poetry">like a traveler on the mountains at twilight. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do it before he turns the light of deliverance you hope for</p>
<p class="poetry">into the darkness and gloom of exile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:17</span> But if you will not pay attention to this warning, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will weep alone because of your arrogant pride.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will weep bitterly, and my eyes will overflow with tears </p>
<p class="poetry">because you, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s flock, will be carried into exile.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told me: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Tell the king and the queen mother,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Surrender your thrones, </p>
<p class="poetry">for your glorious crowns</p>
<p class="poetry">will be removed from your heads. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:19</span> The gates of the towns in southern Judah will be shut tight. </p>
<p class="poetry">No one will be able to go in or out of them. </p>
<p class="poetry">All Judah will be carried off into exile.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will be completely carried off into exile.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:20</span> Then I said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Look up, Jerusalem, and see</p>
<p class="poetry">the enemy that is coming from the north.</p>
<p class="poetry">Where now is the flock of people that were entrusted to your care? </p>
<p class="poetry">Where now are the ‘sheep’ that you take such pride in? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:21</span> What will you say when the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> appoints as rulers over you those allies</p>
<p class="poetry">that you, yourself, had actually prepared as such? </p>
<p class="poetry">Then anguish and agony will grip you</p>
<p class="poetry">like that of a woman giving birth to a baby. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:22</span> You will probably ask yourself, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Why have these things happened to me?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why have I been treated like a disgraced adulteress</p>
<p class="poetry">whose skirt has been torn off and her limbs exposed?’ </p>
<p class="poetry">It is because you have sinned so much. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:23</span> But there is little hope for you ever doing good,</p>
<p class="poetry">you who are so accustomed to doing evil.</p>
<p class="poetry">Can an Ethiopian change the color of his skin?</p>
<p class="poetry">Can a leopard remove its spots? </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:24</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘That is why I will scatter your people like chaff</p>
<p class="poetry">that is blown away by a desert wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:25</span> This is your fate,</p>
<p class="poetry">the destiny to which I have appointed you,</p>
<p class="poetry">because you have forgotten me</p>
<p class="poetry">and have trusted in false gods.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:26</span> So I will pull your skirt up over your face</p>
<p class="poetry">and expose you to shame like a disgraced adulteress! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:27</span> People of Jerusalem, I have seen your adulterous worship, </p>
<p class="poetry">your shameless prostitution to, and your lustful pursuit of, other gods. </p>
<p class="poetry">I have seen your disgusting acts of worship </p>
<p class="poetry">on the hills throughout the countryside.</p>
<p class="poetry">You are doomed to destruction! </p>
<p class="poetry">How long will you continue to be unclean?’” </p>

</body>
</html>