<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle"><b>II. Job’s Dialogue With His Friends (3:1—27:23)</b> </p><p class="paragraphtitle">Job Regrets His Birth</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> After this Job opened his mouth and cursed the day he was born. <span class="verse">3:2</span> Job spoke up and said: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> “Let the day on which I was born perish,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the night that said, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘A man has been conceived!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> That day —let it be darkness; </p>
<p class="poetry">let not God on high regard it,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor let light shine on it!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> Let darkness and the deepest shadow claim it; </p>
<p class="poetry">let a cloud settle on it;</p>
<p class="poetry">let whatever blackens the day terrify it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> That night—let darkness seize it;</p>
<p class="poetry">let it not be included among the days of the year;</p>
<p class="poetry">let it not enter among the number of the months! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Indeed, let that night be barren; </p>
<p class="poetry">let no shout of joy penetrate it!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> Let those who curse the day curse it —</p>
<p class="poetry">those who are prepared to rouse Leviathan. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Let its morning stars be darkened;</p>
<p class="poetry">let it wait for daylight but find none, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor let it see the first rays of dawn, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> because it did not shut the doors of my mother’s womb on me, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor did it hide trouble from my eyes. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job Wishes He Had Died at Birth </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> “Why did I not die at birth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and why did I not expire </p>
<p class="poetry">as I came out of the womb? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Why did the knees welcome me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and why were there two breasts </p>
<p class="poetry">that I might nurse at them? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> For now I would be lying down </p>
<p class="poetry">and would be quiet, </p>
<p class="poetry">I would be asleep and then at peace </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> with kings and counselors of the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">who built for themselves places now desolate, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> or with princes who possessed gold, </p>
<p class="poetry">who filled their palaces with silver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> Or why was I not buried </p>
<p class="poetry">like a stillborn infant, </p>
<p class="poetry">like infants who have never seen the light? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> There the wicked cease from turmoil, </p>
<p class="poetry">and there the weary are at rest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> There the prisoners relax together; </p>
<p class="poetry">they do not hear the voice of the oppressor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> Small and great are there, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the slave is free from his master. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Longing for Death </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:20</span> “Why does God give light to one who is in misery, </p>
<p class="poetry">and life to those whose soul is bitter, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:21</span> to those who wait for death that does not come,</p>
<p class="poetry">and search for it </p>
<p class="poetry">more than for hidden treasures, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:22</span> who rejoice even to jubilation, </p>
<p class="poetry">and are exultant when they find the grave? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:23</span> Why is light given to a man </p>
<p class="poetry">whose way is hidden, </p>
<p class="poetry">and whom God has hedged in? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:24</span> For my sighing comes in place of my food, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my groanings flow forth like water. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:25</span> For the very thing I dreaded has happened to me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and what I feared has come upon me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:26</span> I have no ease, I have no quietness;</p>
<p class="poetry">I cannot rest; turmoil has come upon me.” </p>

</body>
</html>