<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">From Adam to Noah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> This is the record of the family line of Adam.</p>
<p class="bodytext">When God created humankind, he made them in the likeness of God. <span class="verse">5:2</span> He created them male and female; when they were created, he blessed them and named them “humankind.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:3</span> When Adam had lived 130 years he fathered a son in his own likeness, according to his image, and he named him Seth. <span class="verse">5:4</span> The length of time Adam lived after he became the father of Seth was 800 years; during this time he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:5</span> The entire lifetime of Adam was 930 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:6</span> When Seth had lived 105 years, he became the father of Enosh. <span class="verse">5:7</span> Seth lived 807 years after he became the father of Enosh, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:8</span> The entire lifetime of Seth was 912 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:9</span> When Enosh had lived 90 years, he became the father of Kenan. <span class="verse">5:10</span> Enosh lived 815 years after he became the father of Kenan, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:11</span> The entire lifetime of Enosh was 905 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:12</span> When Kenan had lived 70 years, he became the father of Mahalalel. <span class="verse">5:13</span> Kenan lived 840 years after he became the father of Mahalalel, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:14</span> The entire lifetime of Kenan was 910 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:15</span> When Mahalalel had lived 65 years, he became the father of Jared. <span class="verse">5:16</span> Mahalalel lived 830 years after he became the father of Jared, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:17</span> The entire lifetime of Mahalalel was 895 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:18</span> When Jared had lived 162 years, he became the father of Enoch. <span class="verse">5:19</span> Jared lived 800 years after he became the father of Enoch, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:20</span> The entire lifetime of Jared was 962 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:21</span> When Enoch had lived 65 years, he became the father of Methuselah. <span class="verse">5:22</span> After he became the father of Methuselah, Enoch walked with God for 300 years, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:23</span> The entire lifetime of Enoch was 365 years. <span class="verse">5:24</span> Enoch walked with God, and then he disappeared because God took him away.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:25</span> When Methuselah had lived 187 years, he became the father of Lamech. <span class="verse">5:26</span> Methuselah lived 782 years after he became the father of Lamech, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:27</span> The entire lifetime of Methuselah was 969 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:28</span> When Lamech had lived 182 years, he had a son. <span class="verse">5:29</span> He named him Noah, saying, “This one will bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has cursed.” <span class="verse">5:30</span> Lamech lived 595 years after he became the father of Noah, and he had other sons and daughters. <span class="verse">5:31</span> The entire lifetime of Lamech was 777 years, and then he died. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:32</span> After Noah was 500 years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth. </p>

</body>
</html>