<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 38</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 38</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judah and Tamar</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:1</span> At that time Judah left his brothers and stayed with an Adullamite man named Hirah. <span class="verse">38:2</span> There Judah saw the daughter of a Canaanite man named Shua. Judah acquired her as a wife and slept with her. <span class="verse">38:3</span> She became pregnant and had a son. Judah named him Er. <span class="verse">38:4</span> She became pregnant again and had another son, whom she named Onan. <span class="verse">38:5</span> Then she had yet another son, whom she named Shelah. She gave birth to him in Kezib. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:6</span> Judah acquired a wife for Er his firstborn; her name was Tamar. <span class="verse">38:7</span> But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was evil in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sight, so the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> killed him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:8</span> Then Judah said to Onan, “Sleep with your brother’s wife and fulfill the duty of a brother-in-law to her so that you may raise up a descendant for your brother.” <span class="verse">38:9</span> But Onan knew that the child would not be considered his. So whenever he slept with his brother’s wife, he wasted his emission on the ground so as not to give his brother a descendant. <span class="verse">38:10</span> What he did was evil in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s sight, so the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> killed him too. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:11</span> Then Judah said to his daughter-in-law Tamar, “Live as a widow in your father’s house until Shelah my son grows up.” For he thought, “I don’t want him to die like his brothers.” So Tamar went and lived in her father’s house. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:12</span> After some time Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shua, died. After Judah was consoled, he left for Timnah to visit his sheepshearers, along with his friend Hirah the Adullamite. <span class="verse">38:13</span> Tamar was told, “Look, your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep.” <span class="verse">38:14</span> So she removed her widow’s clothes and covered herself with a veil. She wrapped herself and sat at the entrance to Enaim which is on the way to Timnah. (She did this because she saw that she had not been given to Shelah as a wife, even though he had now grown up.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:15</span> When Judah saw her, he thought she was a prostitute because she had covered her face. <span class="verse">38:16</span> He turned aside to her along the road and said, “Come, please, I want to sleep with you.” (He did not realize it was his daughter-in-law.) She asked, “What will you give me so that you may sleep with me?” <span class="verse">38:17</span> He replied, “I’ll send you a young goat from the flock.” She asked, “Will you give me a pledge until you send it?” <span class="verse">38:18</span> He said, “What pledge should I give you?” She replied, “Your seal, your cord, and the staff that’s in your hand.” So he gave them to her, then slept with her, and she became pregnant by him. <span class="verse">38:19</span> She left immediately, removed her veil, and put on her widow’s clothes. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:20</span> Then Judah had his friend Hirah the Adullamite take a young goat to get back from the woman the items he had given in pledge, but Hirah could not find her. <span class="verse">38:21</span> He asked the men who were there, “Where is the cult prostitute who was at Enaim by the road?” But they replied, “There has been no cult prostitute here.” <span class="verse">38:22</span> So he returned to Judah and said, “I couldn’t find her. Moreover, the men of the place said, ‘There has been no cult prostitute here.’” <span class="verse">38:23</span> Judah said, “Let her keep the things for herself. Otherwise we will appear to be dishonest. I did indeed send this young goat, but you couldn’t find her.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:24</span> After three months Judah was told, “Your daughter-in-law Tamar has turned to prostitution, and as a result she has become pregnant.” Judah said, “Bring her out and let her be burned!” <span class="verse">38:25</span> While they were bringing her out, she sent word to her father-in-law: “I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong.” Then she said, “Identify the one to whom the seal, cord, and staff belong.” <span class="verse">38:26</span> Judah recognized them and said, “She is more upright than I am, because I wouldn’t give her to Shelah my son.” He was not physically intimate with her again. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:27</span> When it was time for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb. <span class="verse">38:28</span> While she was giving birth, one child put out his hand, and the midwife took a scarlet thread and tied it on his hand, saying, “This one came out first.” <span class="verse">38:29</span> But then he drew back his hand, and his brother came out before him. She said, “How you have broken out of the womb!” So he was named Perez. <span class="verse">38:30</span> Afterward his brother came out—the one who had the scarlet thread on his hand—and he was named Zerah. </p>

</body>
</html>