<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Levitical Cities</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:1</span> The tribal leaders of the Levites went before Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun and the Israelite tribal leaders <span class="verse">21:2</span> in Shiloh in the land of Canaan and said, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told Moses to assign us cities in which to live along with the grazing areas for our cattle.” <span class="verse">21:3</span> So the Israelites assigned these cities and their grazing areas to the Levites from their own holdings, as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had instructed.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:4</span> The first lot belonged to the Kohathite clans. The Levites who were descendants of Aaron the priest were allotted thirteen cities from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin. <span class="verse">21:5</span> The rest of Kohath’s descendants were allotted ten cities from the clans of the tribe of Ephraim, and from the tribe of Dan and the half-tribe of Manasseh. <span class="verse">21:6</span> Gershon’s descendants were allotted thirteen cities from the clans of the tribe of Issachar, and from the tribes of Asher and Naphtali and the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan. <span class="verse">21:7</span> Merari’s descendants by their clans were allotted twelve cities from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun. <span class="verse">21:8</span> So the Israelites assigned to the Levites by lot these cities and their grazing areas, as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had instructed Moses. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:9</span> They assigned from the tribes of Judah and Simeon the cities listed below. <span class="verse">21:10</span> (They were assigned to the Kohathite clans of the Levites who were descendants of Aaron, for the first lot fell to them.) <span class="verse">21:11</span> They assigned them Kiriath Arba (Arba was the father of Anak), that is, Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, along with its surrounding grazing areas. <span class="verse">21:12</span> (Now the city’s fields and surrounding towns they had assigned to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his property.) <span class="verse">21:13</span> So to the descendants of Aaron the priest they assigned Hebron (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter), Libnah, <span class="verse">21:14</span> Jattir, Eshtemoa, <span class="verse">21:15</span> Holon, Debir, <span class="verse">21:16</span> Ain, Juttah, and Beth Shemesh, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of nine cities taken from these two tribes. <span class="verse">21:17</span> From the tribe of Benjamin they assigned Gibeon, Geba, <span class="verse">21:18</span> Anathoth, and Almon, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities. <span class="verse">21:19</span> The priests descended from Aaron received thirteen cities and their grazing areas. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:20</span> The rest of the Kohathite clans of the Levites were allotted cities from the tribe of Ephraim. <span class="verse">21:21</span> They assigned them Shechem (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter) in the hill country of Ephraim, Gezer, <span class="verse">21:22</span> Kibzaim, and Beth Horon, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities. <span class="verse">21:23</span> From the tribe of Dan they assigned Eltekeh, Gibbethon, <span class="verse">21:24</span> Aijalon, and Gath Rimmon, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities. <span class="verse">21:25</span> From the half-tribe of Manasseh they assigned Taanach and Gath Rimmon, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of two cities. <span class="verse">21:26</span> The rest of the Kohathite clans received ten cities and their grazing areas. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:27</span> They assigned to the Gershonite clans of the Levites the following cities: from the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter) and Beeshtarah, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of two cities; <span class="verse">21:28</span> from the tribe of Issachar: Kishon, Daberath, <span class="verse">21:29</span> Jarmuth, and En Gannim, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities; <span class="verse">21:30</span> from the tribe of Asher: Mishal, Abdon, <span class="verse">21:31</span> Helkath, and Rehob, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities; <span class="verse">21:32</span> from the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter), Hammoth Dor, and Kartan, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of three cities. <span class="verse">21:33</span> The Gershonite clans received thirteen cities and their grazing areas. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:34</span> They assigned to the Merarite clans (the remaining Levites) the following cities: from the tribe of Zebulun: Jokneam, Kartah, <span class="verse">21:35</span> Dimnah, and Nahalal, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities; <span class="verse">21:36</span>  from the tribe of Reuben: Bezer, Jahaz, <span class="verse">21:37</span> Kedemoth, and Mephaath, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities; <span class="verse">21:38</span> from the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead (a city of refuge for one who committed manslaughter), Mahanaim, <span class="verse">21:39</span> Heshbon, and Jazer, along with the grazing areas of each—a total of four cities. <span class="verse">21:40</span> The Merarite clans (the remaining Levites) were allotted twelve cities. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:41</span> The Levites received within the land owned by the Israelites forty-eight cities in all and their grazing areas. <span class="verse">21:42</span> Each of these cities had grazing areas around it; they were alike in this regard. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:43</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> gave Israel all the land he had solemnly promised to their ancestors, and they conquered it and lived in it. <span class="verse">21:44</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made them secure, in fulfillment of all he had solemnly promised their ancestors. None of their enemies could resist them. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> handed all their enemies over to them. <span class="verse">21:45</span> Not one of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s faithful promises to the family of Israel was left unfulfilled; every one was realized. </p>

</body>
</html>