<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Fear God Now Because Old Age and Death Come Quickly</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:1</span> So remember your Creator in the days of your youth—</p>
<p class="poetry">before the difficult days come,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the years draw near when you will say, “I have no pleasure in them”;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:2</span> before the sun and the light of the moon and the stars grow dark,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the clouds disappear after the rain; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:3</span> when those who keep watch over the house begin to tremble, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the virile men begin to stoop over, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the grinders begin to cease because they grow few,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those who look through the windows grow dim, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:4</span> and the doors along the street are shut;</p>
<p class="poetry">when the sound of the grinding mill grows low,</p>
<p class="poetry">and one is awakened by the sound of a bird,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all their songs grow faint, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:5</span> and they are afraid of heights and the dangers in the street;</p>
<p class="poetry">the almond blossoms grow white, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the grasshopper drags itself along, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the caper berry shrivels up —</p>
<p class="poetry">because man goes to his eternal home, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the mourners go about in the streets—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:6</span> before the silver cord is removed,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the golden bowl is broken,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the pitcher is shattered at the well, </p>
<p class="poetry">or the water wheel is broken at the cistern—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:7</span> and the dust returns to the earth as it was,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the life’s breath returns to God who gave it.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concluding Refrain: The Teacher Restates His Thesis</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:8</span> “Absolutely futile!” laments the Teacher, </p>
<p class="poetry">“All  these things are futile!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concluding Epilogue: The Teacher’s Advice is Wise</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:9</span> Not only was the Teacher wise, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he also taught knowledge to the people;</p>
<p class="poetry">he carefully evaluated and arranged many proverbs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:10</span> The Teacher sought to find delightful words,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to write accurately truthful sayings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:11</span> The words of the sages are like prods, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the collected sayings are like firmly fixed nails;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are given by one shepherd. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concluding Exhortation: Fear God and Obey His Commands</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:12</span> Be warned, my son, of anything in addition to them. </p>
<p class="poetry">There is no end to the making of many books,</p>
<p class="poetry">and much study is exhausting to the body. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:13</span> Having heard everything, I have reached this conclusion: </p>
<p class="poetry">Fear God and keep his commandments,</p>
<p class="poetry">because this is the whole duty of man. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:14</span> For God will evaluate every deed, </p>
<p class="poetry">including every secret thing, whether good or evil. </p>

</body>
</html>