<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Miriam and Aaron Oppose Moses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span>  Then Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman he had married (for he had married an Ethiopian woman). <span class="verse">12:2</span> They said, “Has the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoken only through Moses? Has he not also spoken through us?” And the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> heard it. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:3</span> (Now the man Moses was very humble, more so than any man on the face of the earth.) </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Response of the Lord</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke immediately to Moses, Aaron, and Miriam: “The three of you come to the tent of meeting.” So the three of them went. <span class="verse">12:5</span> And the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> came down in a pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the tent; he then called Aaron and Miriam, and they both came forward. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “Hear now my words: If there is a prophet among you, I the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will make myself known to him in a vision; I will speak with him in a dream. <span class="verse">12:7</span> My servant Moses is not like this; he is faithful in all my house. <span class="verse">12:8</span> With him I will speak face to face, openly and not in riddles, and he will see the form of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Why then were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?” <span class="verse">12:9</span> The anger of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> burned against them, and he departed. <span class="verse">12:10</span> After the cloud had departed from above the tent, there was Miriam, leprous like snow. Then Aaron turned toward Miriam, and realized that she was leprous. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Intercession of Moses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:11</span> So Aaron said to Moses, “O my lord, please do not hold this sin against us, in which we have acted foolishly and have sinned! <span class="verse">12:12</span> Do not let her be like a baby born dead, whose flesh is half consumed when it comes out of its mother’s womb!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:13</span> Then Moses cried to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “Heal her now, O God.” <span class="verse">12:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, “If her father had only spit in her face, would she not have been disgraced for seven days? Shut her out from the camp seven days, and afterward she can be brought back in again.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:15</span> So Miriam was shut outside of the camp for seven days, and the people did not journey on until Miriam was brought back in. <span class="verse">12:16</span> After that the people moved from Hazeroth and camped in the wilderness of Paran. </p>

</body>
</html>