<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Judges 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Judges<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Civil Strife Mars the Victory</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> The Ephraimites assembled and crossed over to Zaphon. They said to Jephthah, “Why did you go and fight with the Ammonites without asking us to go with you? We will burn your house down right over you!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:2</span> Jephthah said to them, “My people and I were in a struggle and the Ammonites were oppressing me greatly. I asked for your help, but you did not deliver me from their power. <span class="verse">12:3</span> When I saw that you were not going to help, I risked my life and advanced against the Ammonites, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> handed them over to me. Why have you come up to fight with me today?” <span class="verse">12:4</span> Jephthah assembled all the men of Gilead and they fought with Ephraim. The men of Gilead defeated Ephraim, because the Ephraimites insulted them, saying, “You Gileadites are refugees in Ephraim, living within Ephraim’s and Manasseh’s territory.” <span class="verse">12:5</span> The Gileadites captured the fords of the Jordan River opposite Ephraim. Whenever an Ephraimite fugitive said, “Let me cross over,” the men of Gilead asked him, “Are you an Ephraimite?” If he said, “No,” <span class="verse">12:6</span> then they said to him, “Say ‘Shibboleth!’” If he said, “Sibboleth” (and could not pronounce the word correctly), they grabbed him and executed him right there at the fords of the Jordan. On that day 42,000 Ephraimites fell dead. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:7</span> Jephthah led Israel for six years; then he died and was buried in his town in Gilead. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Order Restored</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:8</span> After him Ibzan of Bethlehem led Israel. <span class="verse">12:9</span> He had thirty sons. He arranged for thirty of his daughters to be married outside his extended family, and he arranged for thirty young women to be brought from outside as wives for his sons. Ibzan led Israel for seven years; <span class="verse">12:10</span> then he died and was buried in Bethlehem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:11</span> After him Elon the Zebulunite led Israel for ten years. <span class="verse">12:12</span> Then Elon the Zebulunite died and was buried in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:13</span> After him Abdon son of Hillel the Pirathonite led Israel. <span class="verse">12:14</span> He had forty sons and thirty grandsons who rode on seventy donkeys. He led Israel for eight years. <span class="verse">12:15</span> Then Abdon son of Hillel the Pirathonite died and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill country of the Amalekites. </p>

</body>
</html>