<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Joshua Challenges Israel to be Faithful</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> A long time passed after the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made Israel secure from all their enemies, and Joshua was very old. <span class="verse">23:2</span> So Joshua summoned all Israel, including the elders, rulers, judges, and leaders, and told them: “I am very old. <span class="verse">23:3</span> You saw everything the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God did to all these nations on your behalf, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God fights for you. <span class="verse">23:4</span> See, I have parceled out to your tribes these remaining nations, from the Jordan to the Mediterranean Sea in the west, including all the nations I defeated. <span class="verse">23:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God will drive them out from before you and remove them, so you can occupy their land as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God promised you. <span class="verse">23:6</span> Be very strong! Carefully obey all that is written in the law scroll of Moses so you won’t swerve from it to the right or the left, <span class="verse">23:7</span> or associate with these nations that remain near you. You must not invoke or make solemn declarations by the names of their gods! You must not worship or bow down to them! <span class="verse">23:8</span> But you must be loyal to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, as you have been to this very day. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:9</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> drove out from before you great and mighty nations; no one has been able to resist you to this very day. <span class="verse">23:10</span> One of you makes a thousand run away, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God fights for you, as he promised you he would. <span class="verse">23:11</span> Watch yourselves carefully! Love the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God! <span class="verse">23:12</span> But if you ever turn away and make alliances with these nations that remain near you, and intermarry with them and establish friendly relations with them, <span class="verse">23:13</span> know for certain that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God will no longer drive out these nations from before you. They will trap and ensnare you; they will be a whip that tears your sides and thorns that blind your eyes until you disappear from this good land the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God gave you.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:14</span> “Look, today I am about to die. You know with all your heart and being that not even one of all the faithful promises the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God made to you is left unfulfilled; every one was realized—not one promise is unfulfilled! <span class="verse">23:15</span> But in the same way every faithful promise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God made to you has been realized, it is just as certain that if you disobey, then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will bring on you every judgment until he destroys you from this good land that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God gave you. <span class="verse">23:16</span> If you violate the covenantal laws of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God which he commanded you to keep, and follow, worship, and bow down to other gods, then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be very angry with you and you will disappear quickly from the good land that he gave to you.”</p>

</body>
</html>