<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 68</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 68</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, by David, a psalm, a song.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:1</span> God springs into action. </p>
<p class="poetry">His enemies scatter;</p>
<p class="poetry">his adversaries run from him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:2</span> As smoke is driven away by the wind, so you drive them away. </p>
<p class="poetry">As wax melts before fire,</p>
<p class="poetry">so the wicked are destroyed before God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:3</span> But the godly are happy;</p>
<p class="poetry">they rejoice before God</p>
<p class="poetry">and are overcome with joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:4</span> Sing to God! Sing praises to his name.</p>
<p class="poetry">Exalt the one who rides on the clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is his name. </p>
<p class="poetry">Rejoice before him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:5</span> He is a father to the fatherless</p>
<p class="poetry">and an advocate for widows. </p>
<p class="poetry">God rules from his holy dwelling place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:6</span> God settles in their own homes those who have been deserted; </p>
<p class="poetry">he frees prisoners and grants them prosperity. </p>
<p class="poetry">But sinful rebels live in the desert. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:7</span> O God, when you lead your people into battle, </p>
<p class="poetry">when you march through the wastelands, (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:8</span> the earth shakes.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, the heavens pour down rain</p>
<p class="poetry">before God, the God of Sinai, </p>
<p class="poetry">before God, the God of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:9</span> O God, you cause abundant showers to fall on your chosen people. </p>
<p class="poetry">When they are tired, you sustain them, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:10</span> for you live among them. </p>
<p class="poetry">You sustain the oppressed with your good blessings, O God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:11</span> The Lord speaks; </p>
<p class="poetry">many, many women spread the good news. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:12</span> Kings leading armies run away—they run away! </p>
<p class="poetry">The lovely lady of the house divides up the loot. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:13</span> When you lie down among the sheepfolds, </p>
<p class="poetry">the wings of the dove are covered with silver</p>
<p class="poetry">and with glittering gold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:14</span> When the Sovereign One scatters kings, </p>
<p class="poetry">let it snow on Zalmon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:15</span> The mountain of Bashan is a towering mountain; </p>
<p class="poetry">the mountain of Bashan is a mountain with many peaks. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:16</span> Why do you look with envy, O mountains with many peaks,</p>
<p class="poetry">at the mountain where God has decided to live? </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will live there permanently. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:17</span> God has countless chariots;</p>
<p class="poetry">they number in the thousands. </p>
<p class="poetry">The Lord comes from Sinai in holy splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:18</span> You ascend on high; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have taken many captives. </p>
<p class="poetry">You receive tribute from men,</p>
<p class="poetry">including even sinful rebels.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God lives there. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:19</span> The Lord deserves praise. </p>
<p class="poetry">Day after day he carries our burden,</p>
<p class="poetry">the God who delivers us. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:20</span> Our God is a God who delivers;</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the Sovereign Lord, can rescue from death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:21</span> Indeed, God strikes the heads of his enemies,</p>
<p class="poetry">the hairy foreheads of those who persist in rebellion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:22</span> The Lord says,</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will retrieve them from Bashan.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will bring them back from the depths of the sea, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:23</span> so that your feet may stomp in their blood,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your dogs may eat their portion of the enemies’ corpses.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:24</span> They see your processions, O God—</p>
<p class="poetry">the processions of my God, my king, who marches along in holy splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:25</span> Singers walk in front;</p>
<p class="poetry">musicians follow playing their stringed instruments, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the midst of young women playing tambourines. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:26</span> In your large assemblies praise God,</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, in the assemblies of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:27</span> There is little Benjamin, their ruler, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the princes of Judah in their robes, </p>
<p class="poetry">along with the princes of Zebulun and the princes of Naphtali. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:28</span> God has decreed that you will be powerful. </p>
<p class="poetry">O God, you who have acted on our behalf, demonstrate your power.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:29</span> Because of your temple in Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry">kings bring tribute to you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:30</span> Sound your battle cry against the wild beast of the reeds, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the nations that assemble like a herd of calves led by bulls. </p>
<p class="poetry">They humble themselves and offer gold and silver as tribute. </p>
<p class="poetry">God scatters the nations that like to do battle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:31</span> They come with red cloth from Egypt.</p>
<p class="poetry">Ethiopia voluntarily offers tribute to God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:32</span> O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Sing praises to the Lord, (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:33</span> to the one who rides through the sky from ancient times. </p>
<p class="poetry">Look! He thunders loudly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:34</span> Acknowledge God’s power, </p>
<p class="poetry">his sovereignty over Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the power he reveals in the skies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">68:35</span> You are awe-inspiring, O God, as you emerge from your holy temple. </p>
<p class="poetry">It is the God of Israel who gives the people power and strength.</p>
<p class="poetry">God deserves praise! </p>

</body>
</html>