<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Samuel 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Samuel<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Subjugates Nearby Nations</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Later David defeated the Philistines and subdued them. David took Metheg Ammah from the Philistines. <span class="verse">8:2</span> He defeated the Moabites. He made them lie on the ground and then used a rope to measure them off. He put two-thirds of them to death and spared the other third. The Moabites became David’s subjects and brought tribute. <span class="verse">8:3</span> David defeated King Hadadezer son of Rehob of Zobah when he came to reestablish his authority over the Euphrates River. <span class="verse">8:4</span> David seized from him 1,700 charioteers and 20,000 infantrymen. David cut the hamstrings of all but 100 of the chariot horses. <span class="verse">8:5</span> The Arameans of Damascus came to help King Hadadezer of Zobah, but David killed 22,000 of the Arameans. <span class="verse">8:6</span> David placed garrisons in the territory of the Arameans of Damascus; the Arameans became David’s subjects and brought tribute. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protected David wherever he campaigned. <span class="verse">8:7</span> David took the golden shields that belonged to Hadadezer’s servants and brought them to Jerusalem. <span class="verse">8:8</span> From Tebah and Berothai, Hadadezer’s cities, King David took a great deal of bronze. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:9</span> When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer, <span class="verse">8:10</span> he sent his son Joram to King David to extend his best wishes and to pronounce a blessing on him for his victory over Hadadezer, for Toi had been at war with Hadadezer. He brought with him various items made of silver, gold, and bronze. <span class="verse">8:11</span> King David dedicated these things to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, along with the dedicated silver and gold that he had taken from all the nations that he had subdued, <span class="verse">8:12</span> including Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek. This also included some of the plunder taken from King Hadadezer son of Rehob of Zobah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:13</span> David became famous when he returned from defeating the Edomites in the Valley of Salt; he defeated 18,000 in all. <span class="verse">8:14</span> He placed garrisons throughout Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protected David wherever he campaigned. <span class="verse">8:15</span> David reigned over all Israel; he guaranteed justice for all his people. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David’s Cabinet</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:16</span> Joab son of Zeruiah was general in command of the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was secretary; <span class="verse">8:17</span> Zadok son of Ahitub and Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Seraiah was scribe; <span class="verse">8:18</span> Benaiah son of Jehoiada supervised the Kerethites and Pelethites; and David’s sons were priests. </p>

</body>
</html>