<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 90</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 90</h2><p class="paragraphtitle"><b>Book 4<br />(Psalms 90-106)</b></p><p class="psasuper">A prayer of Moses, the man of God.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:1</span> O Lord, you have been our protector through all generations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:2</span> Even before the mountains came into existence, </p>
<p class="poetry">or you brought the world into being, </p>
<p class="poetry">you were the eternal God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:3</span> You make mankind return to the dust, </p>
<p class="poetry">and say, “Return, O people.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:4</span> Yes, in your eyes a thousand years</p>
<p class="poetry">are like yesterday that quickly passes,</p>
<p class="poetry">or like one of the divisions of the nighttime. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:5</span> You bring their lives to an end and they “fall asleep.” </p>
<p class="poetry">In the morning they are like the grass that sprouts up: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:6</span> In the morning it glistens and sprouts up;</p>
<p class="poetry">at evening time it withers and dries up.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:7</span> Yes, we are consumed by your anger;</p>
<p class="poetry">we are terrified by your wrath. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:8</span> You are aware of our sins; </p>
<p class="poetry">you even know about our hidden sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:9</span> Yes, throughout all our days we experience your raging fury; </p>
<p class="poetry">the years of our lives pass quickly, like a sigh. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:10</span> The days of our lives add up to seventy years, </p>
<p class="poetry">or eighty, if one is especially strong. </p>
<p class="poetry">But even one’s best years are marred by trouble and oppression. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, they pass quickly and we fly away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:11</span> Who can really fathom the intensity of your anger? </p>
<p class="poetry">Your raging fury causes people to fear you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:12</span> So teach us to consider our mortality, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that we might live wisely. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:13</span> Turn back toward us, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">How long must this suffering last? </p>
<p class="poetry">Have pity on your servants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:14</span> Satisfy us in the morning with your loyal love.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then we will shout for joy and be happy all our days. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:15</span> Make us happy in proportion to the days you have afflicted us,</p>
<p class="poetry">in proportion to the years we have experienced trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:16</span> May your servants see your work. </p>
<p class="poetry">May their sons see your majesty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">90:17</span> May our Sovereign God extend his favor to us. </p>
<p class="poetry">Make our endeavors successful.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, make them successful. </p>

</body>
</html>