<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:1</span> Wine is a mocker and strong drink is a brawler;</p>
<p class="poetry">whoever goes astray by them is not wise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:2</span> The king’s terrifying anger is like the roar of a lion;</p>
<p class="poetry">whoever provokes him sins against himself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:3</span> It is an honor for a person to cease from strife,</p>
<p class="poetry">but every fool quarrels. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:4</span> The sluggard will not plow during the planting season, </p>
<p class="poetry">so at harvest time he asks for grain but has nothing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:5</span> Counsel in a person’s heart is like deep water, </p>
<p class="poetry">but an understanding person draws it out.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:6</span> Many people profess their loyalty, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a faithful person —who can find? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:7</span> The righteous person behaves in integrity; </p>
<p class="poetry">blessed are his children after him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:8</span> A king sitting on the throne to judge </p>
<p class="poetry">separates out all evil with his eyes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:9</span> Who can say, “I have kept my heart clean; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am pure from my sin”? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:10</span> Diverse weights and diverse measures —</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors both of them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:11</span> Even a young man is known by his actions,</p>
<p class="poetry">whether his activity is pure and whether it is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:12</span> The ear that hears and the eye that sees —</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has made them both. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:13</span> Do not love sleep, lest you become impoverished;</p>
<p class="poetry">open your eyes so that you might be satisfied with food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:14</span> “It’s worthless! It’s worthless!” says the buyer, </p>
<p class="poetry">but when he goes on his way, he boasts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:15</span> There is gold, and an abundance of rubies,</p>
<p class="poetry">but words of knowledge are like a precious jewel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:16</span> Take a man’s garment when he has given security for a stranger, </p>
<p class="poetry">and hold him in pledge on behalf of strangers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:17</span> Bread gained by deceit tastes sweet to a person, </p>
<p class="poetry">but afterward his mouth will be filled with gravel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:18</span> Plans are established by counsel,</p>
<p class="poetry">so make war with guidance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:19</span> The one who goes about gossiping reveals secrets;</p>
<p class="poetry">therefore do not associate with someone who is always opening his mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:20</span> The one who curses his father and his mother,</p>
<p class="poetry">his lamp will be extinguished in the blackest darkness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:21</span> An inheritance gained easily in the beginning</p>
<p class="poetry">will not be blessed in the end. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:22</span> Do not say, “I will pay back evil!”</p>
<p class="poetry">Wait for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, so that he may vindicate you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:23</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors differing weights,</p>
<p class="poetry">and dishonest scales are wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:24</span> The steps of a person are ordained by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—</p>
<p class="poetry">so how can anyone understand his own way? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:25</span> It is a snare for a person to rashly cry, “Holy!”</p>
<p class="poetry">and only afterward to consider what he has vowed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:26</span> A wise king separates out the wicked;</p>
<p class="poetry">he turns the threshing wheel over them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:27</span> The human spirit is like the lamp of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">searching all his innermost parts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:28</span> Loyal love and truth preserve a king,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his throne is upheld by loyal love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:29</span> The glory of young men is their strength,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the splendor of old men is gray hair. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">20:30</span> Beatings and wounds cleanse away evil,</p>
<p class="poetry">and floggings cleanse the innermost being. </p>

</body>
</html>