<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 35</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 35</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Land and Its People Are Transformed</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:1</span> Let the wilderness and desert be happy; </p>
<p class="poetry">let the arid rift valley rejoice and bloom like a lily! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:2</span> Let it richly bloom; </p>
<p class="poetry">let it rejoice and shout with delight! </p>
<p class="poetry">It is given the grandeur of Lebanon,</p>
<p class="poetry">the splendor of Carmel and Sharon.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will see the grandeur of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">the splendor of our God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:3</span> Strengthen the hands that have gone limp,</p>
<p class="poetry">steady the knees that shake. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:4</span> Tell those who panic, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Be strong! Do not fear!</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, your God comes to avenge;</p>
<p class="poetry">with divine retribution he comes to deliver you.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:5</span> Then blind eyes will open,</p>
<p class="poetry">deaf ears will hear.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:6</span> Then the lame will leap like a deer,</p>
<p class="poetry">the mute tongue will shout for joy;</p>
<p class="poetry">for water will burst forth in the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">streams in the arid rift valley. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:7</span> The dry soil will become a pool of water,</p>
<p class="poetry">the parched ground springs of water.</p>
<p class="poetry">Where jackals once lived and sprawled out,</p>
<p class="poetry">grass, reeds, and papyrus will grow.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:8</span> A thoroughfare will be there—</p>
<p class="poetry">it will be called the Way of Holiness. </p>
<p class="poetry">The unclean will not travel on it;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is reserved for those authorized to use it —</p>
<p class="poetry">fools will not stray into it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:9</span> No lions will be there,</p>
<p class="poetry">no ferocious wild animals will be on it —</p>
<p class="poetry">they will not be found there.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those delivered from bondage will travel on it,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:10</span> those whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has ransomed will return that way. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will enter Zion with a happy shout.</p>
<p class="poetry">Unending joy will crown them, </p>
<p class="poetry">happiness and joy will overwhelm them;</p>
<p class="poetry">grief and suffering will disappear. </p>

</body>
</html>