<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Romans 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condemnation of the Moralist</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span>  Therefore you are without excuse, whoever you are, when you judge someone else. For on whatever grounds you judge another, you condemn yourself, because you who judge practice the same things. <span class="verse">2:2</span> Now we know that God’s judgment is in accordance with truth against those who practice such things. <span class="verse">2:3</span> And do you think, whoever you are, when you judge those who practice such things and yet do them yourself, that you will escape God’s judgment? <span class="verse">2:4</span> Or do you have contempt for the wealth of his kindness, forbearance, and patience, and yet do not know that God’s kindness leads you to repentance? <span class="verse">2:5</span> But because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourselves in the day of wrath, when God’s righteous judgment is revealed! <span class="verse">2:6</span> He <b><i>will reward</i></b> <b><i>each one according to his works</i></b>: <span class="verse">2:7</span> eternal life to those who by perseverance in good works seek glory and honor and immortality, <span class="verse">2:8</span> but wrath and anger to those who live in selfish ambition and do not obey the truth but follow unrighteousness. <span class="verse">2:9</span> There will be affliction and distress on everyone who does evil, on the Jew first and also the Greek, <span class="verse">2:10</span> but glory and honor and peace for everyone who does good, for the Jew first and also the Greek. <span class="verse">2:11</span> For there is no partiality with God. <span class="verse">2:12</span> For all who have sinned apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, and all who have sinned under the law will be judged by the law. <span class="verse">2:13</span> For it is not those who hear the law who are righteous before God, but those who do the law will be declared righteous. <span class="verse">2:14</span> For whenever the Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature the things required by the law, these who do not have the law are a law to themselves. <span class="verse">2:15</span> They show that the work of the law is written in their hearts, as their conscience bears witness and their conflicting thoughts accuse or else defend them, <span class="verse">2:16</span> on the day when God will judge the secrets of human hearts, according to my gospel through Christ Jesus. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condemnation of the Jew</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:17</span> But if you call yourself a Jew and rely on the law and boast of your relationship to God <span class="verse">2:18</span> and know his will and approve the superior things because you receive instruction from the law, <span class="verse">2:19</span> and if you are convinced that you yourself are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in darkness, <span class="verse">2:20</span> an educator of the senseless, a teacher of little children, because you have in the law the essential features of knowledge and of the truth— <span class="verse">2:21</span> therefore you who teach someone else, do you not teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal? <span class="verse">2:22</span> You who tell others not to commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples? <span class="verse">2:23</span> You who boast in the law dishonor God by transgressing the law! <span class="verse">2:24</span> For just as it is written, “<b><i>the name of God is being blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you</i></b>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:25</span> For circumcision has its value if you practice the law, but if you break the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision. <span class="verse">2:26</span> Therefore if the uncircumcised man obeys the righteous requirements of the law, will not his uncircumcision be regarded as circumcision? <span class="verse">2:27</span> And the physically uncircumcised man, by keeping the law, will judge you to be the transgressor of the law, even though you have the letter and circumcision! <span class="verse">2:28</span> For a person is not a Jew who is one outwardly, nor is circumcision something that is outward in the flesh, <span class="verse">2:29</span> but someone is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is of the heart by the Spirit and not by the letter. This person’s praise is not from people but from God. </p>

</body>
</html>