<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 49</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 49</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Blessing of Jacob</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">49:1</span> Jacob called for his sons and said, “Gather together so I can tell you what will happen to you in future days. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:2</span> “Assemble and listen, you sons of Jacob;</p>
<p class="poetry">listen to Israel, your father. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:3</span> Reuben, you are my firstborn,</p>
<p class="poetry">my might and the beginning of my strength,</p>
<p class="poetry">outstanding in dignity, outstanding in power.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:4</span> You are destructive like water and will not excel, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you got on your father’s bed, </p>
<p class="poetry">then you defiled it—he got on my couch! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:5</span> Simeon and Levi are brothers,</p>
<p class="poetry">weapons of violence are their knives! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:6</span> O my soul, do not come into their council,</p>
<p class="poetry">do not be united to their assembly, my heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">for in their anger they have killed men,</p>
<p class="poetry">and for pleasure they have hamstrung oxen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:7</span> Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their fury, for it was cruel.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will divide them in Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">and scatter them in Israel! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:8</span> Judah, your brothers will praise you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your hand will be on the neck of your enemies,</p>
<p class="poetry">your father’s sons will bow down before you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:9</span> You are a lion’s cub, Judah,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the prey, my son, you have gone up.</p>
<p class="poetry">He crouches and lies down like a lion;</p>
<p class="poetry">like a lioness—who will rouse him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:10</span> The scepter will not depart from Judah,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet, </p>
<p class="poetry">until he comes to whom it belongs; </p>
<p class="poetry">the nations will obey him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:11</span> Binding his foal to the vine,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his colt to the choicest vine,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will wash his garments in wine,</p>
<p class="poetry">his robes in the blood of grapes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:12</span> His eyes will be red from wine,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his teeth white from milk. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:13</span> Zebulun will live by the haven of the sea</p>
<p class="poetry">and become a haven for ships;</p>
<p class="poetry">his border will extend to Sidon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:14</span> Issachar is a strong-boned donkey</p>
<p class="poetry">lying down between two saddlebags. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:15</span> When he sees a good resting place, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the pleasant land,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will bend his shoulder to the burden</p>
<p class="poetry">and become a slave laborer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:16</span> Dan will judge his people</p>
<p class="poetry">as one of the tribes of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:17</span> May Dan be a snake beside the road,</p>
<p class="poetry">a viper by the path,</p>
<p class="poetry">that bites the heels of the horse</p>
<p class="poetry">so that its rider falls backward. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:18</span> I wait for your deliverance, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:19</span> Gad will be raided by marauding bands,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he will attack them at their heels. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:20</span> Asher’s food will be rich, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he will provide delicacies to royalty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:21</span> Naphtali is a free running doe, </p>
<p class="poetry">he speaks delightful words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:22</span> Joseph is a fruitful bough, </p>
<p class="poetry">a fruitful bough near a spring</p>
<p class="poetry">whose branches climb over the wall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:23</span> The archers will attack him, </p>
<p class="poetry">they will shoot at him and oppose him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:24</span> But his bow will remain steady,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his hands will be skillful;</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the hands of the Powerful One of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the Shepherd, the Rock of Israel, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:25</span> because of the God of your father, </p>
<p class="poetry">who will help you, </p>
<p class="poetry">because of the Sovereign God, </p>
<p class="poetry">who will bless you </p>
<p class="poetry">with blessings from the sky above,</p>
<p class="poetry">blessings from the deep that lies below,</p>
<p class="poetry">and blessings of the breasts and womb. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:26</span> The blessings of your father are greater </p>
<p class="poetry">than the blessings of the eternal mountains </p>
<p class="poetry">or the desirable things of the age-old hills.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will be on the head of Joseph</p>
<p class="poetry">and on the brow of the prince of his brothers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:27</span> Benjamin is a ravenous wolf;</p>
<p class="poetry">in the morning devouring the prey,</p>
<p class="poetry">and in the evening dividing the plunder.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">49:28</span> These are the twelve tribes of Israel. This is what their father said to them when he blessed them. He gave each of them an appropriate blessing. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">49:29</span> Then he instructed them, “I am about to go to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave in the field of Ephron the Hittite. <span class="verse">49:30</span> It is the cave in the field of Machpelah, near Mamre in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought for a burial plot from Ephron the Hittite. <span class="verse">49:31</span> There they buried Abraham and his wife Sarah; there they buried Isaac and his wife Rebekah; and there I buried Leah. <span class="verse">49:32</span> The field and the cave in it were acquired from the sons of Heth.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">49:33</span> When Jacob finished giving these instructions to his sons, he pulled his feet up onto the bed, breathed his last breath, and went to his people. </p>

</body>
</html>