<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 32</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 32</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle"><b>V. The Speeches of Elihu (32:1—37:24)</b></p><p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu’s First Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">32:1</span> So these three men refused to answer Job further, because he was righteous in his own eyes. <span class="verse">32:2</span> Then Elihu son of Barakel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, became very angry. He was angry with Job for justifying himself rather than God. <span class="verse">32:3</span> With Job’s three friends he was also angry, because they could not find an answer, and so declared Job guilty. <span class="verse">32:4</span> Now Elihu had waited before speaking to Job, because the others were older than he was. <span class="verse">32:5</span> But when Elihu saw that the three men had no further reply, he became very angry. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elihu Claims Wisdom</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">32:6</span> So Elihu son of Barakel the Buzite spoke up: </p>
<p class="poetry">“I am young, but you are elderly;</p>
<p class="poetry">that is why I was fearful, </p>
<p class="poetry">and afraid to explain to you what I know. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:7</span> I said to myself, ‘Age should speak, </p>
<p class="poetry">and length of years should make wisdom known.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:8</span> But it is a spirit in people,</p>
<p class="poetry">the breath of the Almighty,</p>
<p class="poetry">that makes them understand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:9</span> It is not the aged who are wise,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor old men who understand what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:10</span> Therefore I say, ‘Listen to me.</p>
<p class="poetry">I, even I, will explain what I know.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:11</span> Look, I waited for you to speak; </p>
<p class="poetry">I listened closely to your wise thoughts, while you were searching for words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:12</span> Now I was paying you close attention, </p>
<p class="poetry">yet there was no one proving Job wrong, </p>
<p class="poetry">not one of you was answering his statements. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:13</span> So do not say, ‘We have found wisdom.</p>
<p class="poetry">God will refute him, not man.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:14</span> Job has not directed his words to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and so I will not reply to him with your arguments. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Friends Failed to Answer </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:15</span> “They are dismayed and cannot answer anymore;</p>
<p class="poetry">they have nothing left to say. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:16</span> And I have waited. But because they do not speak,</p>
<p class="poetry">because they stand there and answer no more, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:17</span> I too will answer my part,</p>
<p class="poetry">I too will explain what I know. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:18</span> For I am full of words,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the spirit within me constrains me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:19</span> Inside I am like wine that has no outlet, </p>
<p class="poetry">like new wineskins ready to burst! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:20</span> I will speak, so that I may find relief;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will open my lips, so that I may answer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:21</span> I will not show partiality to any person, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor will I confer a title on anyone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">32:22</span> For I do not know how to give honorary titles, </p>
<p class="poetry">if I did, my Creator would quickly do away with me. </p>

</body>
</html>