<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Male Bodily Discharges </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses and Aaron: <span class="verse">15:2</span> “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When any man has a discharge from his body, his discharge is unclean. <span class="verse">15:3</span> Now this is his uncleanness in regard to his discharge —whether his body secretes his discharge or blocks his discharge, he is unclean. All the days that his body has a discharge or his body blocks his discharge, this is his uncleanness. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:4</span> “‘Any bed the man with a discharge lies on will be unclean, and any furniture he sits on will be unclean. <span class="verse">15:5</span> Anyone who touches his bed must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:6</span> The one who sits on the furniture the man with a discharge sits on must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:7</span> The one who touches the body of the man with a discharge must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:8</span> If the man with a discharge spits on a person who is ceremonially clean, that person must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:9</span> Any means of riding that the man with a discharge rides on will be unclean. <span class="verse">15:10</span> Anyone who touches anything that was under him will be unclean until evening, and the one who carries those items must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:11</span> Anyone whom the man with the discharge touches without having rinsed his hands in water must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:12</span> A clay vessel which the man with the discharge touches must be broken, and any wooden utensil must be rinsed in water. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Purity Regulations for Male Bodily Discharges </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:13</span> “‘When the man with the discharge becomes clean from his discharge he is to count off for himself seven days for his purification, and he must wash his clothes, bathe in fresh water, and be clean. <span class="verse">15:14</span> Then on the eighth day he is to take for himself two turtledoves or two young pigeons, and he is to present himself before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at the entrance of the Meeting Tent and give them to the priest, <span class="verse">15:15</span> and the priest is to make one of them a sin offering and the other a burnt offering. So the priest is to make atonement for him before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for his discharge. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:16</span> “‘When a man has a seminal emission, he must bathe his whole body in water and be unclean until evening, <span class="verse">15:17</span> and he must wash in water any clothing or leather that has semen on it, and it will be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:18</span> As for a woman whom a man goes to bed with, then has a seminal emission, they must bathe in water and be unclean until evening. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Female Bodily Discharges</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:19</span> “‘When a woman has a discharge and her discharge is blood from her body, she is to be in her menstruation seven days, and anyone who touches her will be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:20</span> Anything she lies on during her menstruation will be unclean, and anything she sits on will be unclean. <span class="verse">15:21</span> Anyone who touches her bed must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:22</span> Anyone who touches any furniture she sits on must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. <span class="verse">15:23</span> If there is something on the bed or on the furniture she sits on, when he touches it he will be unclean until evening, <span class="verse">15:24</span> and if a man actually goes to bed with her so that her menstrual impurity touches him, then he will be unclean seven days and any bed he lies on will be unclean. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:25</span> “‘When a woman’s discharge of blood flows many days not at the time of her menstruation, or if it flows beyond the time of her menstruation, all the days of her discharge of impurity will be like the days of her menstruation—she is unclean. <span class="verse">15:26</span> Any bed she lies on all the days of her discharge will be to her like the bed of her menstruation, any furniture she sits on will be unclean like the impurity of her menstruation, <span class="verse">15:27</span> and anyone who touches them will be unclean, and he must wash his clothes, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Purity Regulations for Female Bodily Discharges</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:28</span> “‘If she becomes clean from her discharge, then she is to count off for herself seven days, and afterward she will be clean. <span class="verse">15:29</span> Then on the eighth day she must take for herself two turtledoves or two young pigeons and she must bring them to the priest at the entrance of the Meeting Tent, <span class="verse">15:30</span> and the priest is to make one a sin offering and the other a burnt offering. So the priest is to make atonement for her before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from her discharge of impurity. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Summary of Purification Regulations for Bodily Discharges</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:31</span> “‘Thus you are to set the Israelites apart from their impurity so that they do not die in their impurity by defiling my tabernacle which is in their midst. <span class="verse">15:32</span> This is the law for the one with a discharge: for the one who has a seminal emission and becomes unclean by it, <span class="verse">15:33</span> for the one who is sick in her menstruation, for the one with a discharge, whether male or female, and for a man who goes to bed with an unclean woman.’”</p>

</body>
</html>