<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 106</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 106</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:1</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Give thanks to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for he is good,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his loyal love endures. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:2</span> Who can adequately recount the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s mighty acts,</p>
<p class="poetry">or relate all his praiseworthy deeds? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:3</span> How blessed are those who promote justice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do what is right all the time. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:4</span> Remember me, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, when you show favor to your people.</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention to me, when you deliver, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:5</span> so I may see the prosperity of your chosen ones,</p>
<p class="poetry">rejoice along with your nation, </p>
<p class="poetry">and boast along with the people who belong to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:6</span> We have sinned like our ancestors; </p>
<p class="poetry">we have done wrong, we have done evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:7</span> Our ancestors in Egypt failed to appreciate your miraculous deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry">They failed to remember your many acts of loyal love,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:8</span> Yet he delivered them for the sake of his reputation, </p>
<p class="poetry">that he might reveal his power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:9</span> He shouted at the Red Sea and it dried up;</p>
<p class="poetry">he led them through the deep water as if it were a desert. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:10</span> He delivered them from the power of the one who hated them,</p>
<p class="poetry">and rescued them from the power of the enemy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:11</span> The water covered their enemies;</p>
<p class="poetry">not even one of them survived. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:12</span> They believed his promises; </p>
<p class="poetry">they sang praises to him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:13</span> They quickly forgot what he had done; </p>
<p class="poetry">they did not wait for his instructions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:14</span> In the wilderness they had an insatiable craving for meat; </p>
<p class="poetry">they challenged God in the wastelands.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:15</span> He granted their request,</p>
<p class="poetry">then struck them with a disease. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:16</span> In the camp they resented Moses,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Aaron, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s holy priest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:17</span> The earth opened up and swallowed Dathan; </p>
<p class="poetry">it engulfed the group led by Abiram. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:18</span> Fire burned their group;</p>
<p class="poetry">the flames scorched the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:19</span> They made an image of a calf at Horeb, </p>
<p class="poetry">and worshiped a metal idol. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:20</span> They traded their majestic God </p>
<p class="poetry">for the image of an ox that eats grass. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:21</span> They rejected the God who delivered them,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who performed great deeds in Egypt, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:22</span> amazing feats in the land of Ham,</p>
<p class="poetry">mighty acts by the Red Sea.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:23</span> He threatened to destroy them,</p>
<p class="poetry">but Moses, his chosen one, interceded with him </p>
<p class="poetry">and turned back his destructive anger. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:24</span> They rejected the fruitful land; </p>
<p class="poetry">they did not believe his promise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:25</span> They grumbled in their tents; </p>
<p class="poetry">they did not obey the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:26</span> So he made a solemn vow </p>
<p class="poetry">that he would make them die in the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:27</span> make their descendants die among the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">and scatter them among foreign lands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:28</span> They worshiped Baal of Peor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and ate sacrifices offered to the dead. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:29</span> They made the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> angry by their actions,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a plague broke out among them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:30</span> Phinehas took a stand and intervened, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the plague subsided. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:31</span> This was credited to Phinehas as a righteous act</p>
<p class="poetry">for all generations to come. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:32</span> They made him angry by the waters of Meribah,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Moses suffered because of them,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:33</span> for they aroused his temper, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he spoke rashly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:34</span> They did not destroy the nations, </p>
<p class="poetry">as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded them to do.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:35</span> They mixed in with the nations</p>
<p class="poetry">and learned their ways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:36</span> They worshiped their idols,</p>
<p class="poetry">which became a snare to them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:37</span> They sacrificed their sons and daughters to demons. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:38</span> They shed innocent blood—</p>
<p class="poetry">the blood of their sons and daughters,</p>
<p class="poetry">whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan.</p>
<p class="poetry">The land was polluted by bloodshed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:39</span> They were defiled by their deeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">and unfaithful in their actions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:40</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was angry with his people </p>
<p class="poetry">and despised the people who belonged to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:41</span> He handed them over to the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those who hated them ruled over them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:42</span> Their enemies oppressed them;</p>
<p class="poetry">they were subject to their authority. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:43</span> Many times he delivered them,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they had a rebellious attitude, </p>
<p class="poetry">and degraded themselves by their sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:44</span> Yet he took notice of their distress,</p>
<p class="poetry">when he heard their cry for help.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:45</span> He remembered his covenant with them,</p>
<p class="poetry">and relented because of his great loyal love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:46</span> He caused all their conquerors </p>
<p class="poetry">to have pity on them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:47</span> Deliver us, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, our God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Gather us from among the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then we will give thanks to your holy name,</p>
<p class="poetry">and boast about your praiseworthy deeds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">106:48</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel deserves praise, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the future and forevermore. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let all the people say, “We agree! Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!” </p>

</body>
</html>