<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:1</span> When King Jehoshaphat of Judah returned home safely to Jerusalem, <span class="verse">19:2</span> the prophet Jehu son of Hanani confronted him; he said to King Jehoshaphat, “Is it right to help the wicked and be an ally of those who oppose the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>? Because you have done this, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is angry with you! <span class="verse">19:3</span> Nevertheless you have done some good things; you removed the Asherah poles from the land and you were determined to follow God.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jehoshaphat Appoints Judges</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:4</span> Jehoshaphat lived in Jerusalem. He went out among the people from Beer Sheba to the hill country of Ephraim and encouraged them to follow the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors. <span class="verse">19:5</span> He appointed judges throughout the land and in each of the fortified cities of Judah. <span class="verse">19:6</span> He told the judges, “Be careful what you do, for you are not judging for men, but for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who will be with you when you make judicial decisions. <span class="verse">19:7</span> Respect the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and make careful decisions, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God disapproves of injustice, partiality, and bribery.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:8</span> In Jerusalem Jehoshaphat appointed some Levites, priests, and Israelite family leaders to judge on behalf of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and to settle disputes among the residents of Jerusalem. <span class="verse">19:9</span> He commanded them: “Carry out your duties with respect for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, with honesty, and with pure motives. <span class="verse">19:10</span> Whenever your countrymen who live in the cities bring a case before you (whether it involves a violent crime or other matters related to the law, commandments, rules, and regulations), warn them that they must not sin against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. If you fail to do so, God will be angry with you and your colleagues, but if you obey, you will be free of guilt. <span class="verse">19:11</span> Take note, Amariah the chief priest will oversee you in every matter pertaining to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and Zebadiah son of Ishmael, the leader of the family of Judah, in every matter pertaining to the king. The Levites will serve as officials before you. Act courageously, and may the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> be with those who do well!” </p>

</body>
</html>