<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 42</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 42</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Confession</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:1</span> Then Job answered the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:2</span> “I know that you can do all things;</p>
<p class="poetry">no purpose of yours can be thwarted; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:3</span> you asked, ‘Who is this who darkens counsel without knowledge?’</p>
<p class="poetry">But I have declared without understanding </p>
<p class="poetry">things too wonderful for me to know. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:4</span> You said, ‘Pay attention, and I will speak;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will question you, and you will answer me.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:5</span> I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear,</p>
<p class="poetry">but now my eye has seen you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:6</span> Therefore I despise myself, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I repent in dust and ashes!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle"><b>VII. The Epilogue (42:7—17)</b></p><p class="paragraphtitle"><b>Job’s Restoration</b></p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:7</span> After the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had spoken these things to Job, he said to Eliphaz the Temanite, “My anger is stirred up against you and your two friends, because you have not spoken about me what is right, as my servant Job has. <span class="verse">42:8</span> So now take seven bulls and seven rams and go to my servant Job and offer a burnt offering for yourselves. And my servant Job will intercede for you, and I will respect him, so that I do not deal with you according to your folly, because you have not spoken about me what is right, as my servant Job has.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:9</span> So they went, Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, and did just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had told them; and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had respect for Job. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:10</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> restored what Job had lost after he prayed for his friends, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> doubled all that had belonged to Job. <span class="verse">42:11</span> So they came to him, all his brothers and sisters and all who had known him before, and they dined with him in his house. They comforted him and consoled him for all the trouble the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had brought on him, and each one gave him a piece of silver and a gold ring. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:12</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> blessed the second part of Job’s life more than the first. He had 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, 1,000 yoke of oxen, and 1,000 female donkeys. <span class="verse">42:13</span> And he also had seven sons and three daughters. <span class="verse">42:14</span> The first daughter he named Jemimah, the second Keziah, and the third Keren-Happuch. <span class="verse">42:15</span> Nowhere in all the land could women be found who were as beautiful as Job’s daughters, and their father granted them an inheritance alongside their brothers. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:16</span> After this Job lived 140 years; he saw his children and their children to the fourth generation. <span class="verse">42:17</span> And so Job died, old and full of days. </p>

</body>
</html>