<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:1</span> whenever I want to heal Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">the sin of Ephraim is revealed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the evil deeds of Samaria are exposed.</p>
<p class="poetry">For they do what is wrong;</p>
<p class="poetry">thieves break into houses,</p>
<p class="poetry">and gangs rob people out in the streets. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:2</span> They do not realize </p>
<p class="poetry">that I remember all their wicked deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their evil deeds have now surrounded them;</p>
<p class="poetry">their sinful deeds are always before me. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Political Intrigue and Conspiracy in the Palace</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:3</span> The royal advisers delight the king with their evil schemes,</p>
<p class="poetry">the princes make him glad with their lies.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:4</span> They are all like bakers, </p>
<p class="poetry">they are like a smoldering oven;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are like a baker who does not stoke the fire</p>
<p class="poetry">until the kneaded dough is ready for baking. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:5</span> At the celebration of their king, </p>
<p class="poetry">his princes become inflamed with wine;</p>
<p class="poetry">they conspire with evildoers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:6</span> They approach him, all the while plotting against him.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their hearts are like an oven;</p>
<p class="poetry">their anger smolders all night long,</p>
<p class="poetry">but in the morning it bursts into a flaming fire. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> All of them are blazing like an oven;</p>
<p class="poetry">they devour their rulers.</p>
<p class="poetry">All their kings fall, </p>
<p class="poetry">and none of them call on me!</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Lacks Discernment and Refuses to Repent</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:8</span> Ephraim has mixed itself like flour among the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim is like a ruined cake of bread that is scorched on one side. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> Foreigners are consuming what his strenuous labor produced, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he does not recognize it.</p>
<p class="poetry">His head is filled with gray hair,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he does not realize it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:10</span> The arrogance of Israel testifies against him,</p>
<p class="poetry">yet they refuse to return to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God.</p>
<p class="poetry">In spite of all this they refuse to seek him.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Turns to Assyria and Egypt for Help</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:11</span> Ephraim has been like a dove, </p>
<p class="poetry">easily deceived and lacking discernment.</p>
<p class="poetry">They called to Egypt for help;</p>
<p class="poetry">they turned to Assyria for protection. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:12</span> I will throw my bird net over them while they are flying;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will bring them down like birds in the sky;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will discipline them when I hear them flocking together. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Has Turned Away from the Lord</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:13</span> Woe to them! For they have fled from me!</p>
<p class="poetry">Destruction to them! For they have rebelled against me!</p>
<p class="poetry">I want to deliver them,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they have lied to me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:14</span> They do not pray to me, </p>
<p class="poetry">but howl in distress on their beds;</p>
<p class="poetry">they slash themselves for grain and new wine,</p>
<p class="poetry">but turn away from me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:15</span> Although I trained and strengthened them, </p>
<p class="poetry">they plot evil against me!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:16</span> They turn to Baal; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are like an unreliable bow. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their leaders will fall by the sword</p>
<p class="poetry">because their prayers to Baal have made me angry.</p>
<p class="poetry">So people will disdain them in the land of Egypt. </p>

</body>
</html>