<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 45</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 45</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Reconciliation of the Brothers</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">45:1</span> Joseph was no longer able to control himself before all his attendants, so he cried out, “Make everyone go out from my presence!” No one remained with Joseph when he made himself known to his brothers. <span class="verse">45:2</span> He wept loudly; the Egyptians heard it and Pharaoh’s household heard about it. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">45:3</span> Joseph said to his brothers, “I am Joseph! Is my father still alive?” His brothers could not answer him because they were dumbfounded before him. <span class="verse">45:4</span> Joseph said to his brothers, “Come closer to me,” so they came near. Then he said, “I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. <span class="verse">45:5</span> Now, do not be upset and do not be angry with yourselves because you sold me here, for God sent me ahead of you to preserve life! <span class="verse">45:6</span> For these past two years there has been famine in the land and for five more years there will be neither plowing nor harvesting. <span class="verse">45:7</span> God sent me ahead of you to preserve you on the earth and to save your lives by a great deliverance. <span class="verse">45:8</span> So now, it is not you who sent me here, but God. He has made me an adviser to Pharaoh, lord over all his household, and ruler over all the land of Egypt. <span class="verse">45:9</span> Now go up to my father quickly and tell him, ‘This is what your son Joseph says: “God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come down to me; do not delay! <span class="verse">45:10</span> You will live in the land of Goshen, and you will be near me—you, your children, your grandchildren, your flocks, your herds, and everything you have. <span class="verse">45:11</span> I will provide you with food there because there will be five more years of famine. Otherwise you would become poor—you, your household, and everyone who belongs to you.”’ <span class="verse">45:12</span> You and my brother Benjamin can certainly see with your own eyes that I really am the one who speaks to you. <span class="verse">45:13</span> So tell my father about all my honor in Egypt and about everything you have seen. But bring my father down here quickly!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">45:14</span> Then he threw himself on the neck of his brother Benjamin and wept, and Benjamin wept on his neck. <span class="verse">45:15</span> He kissed all his brothers and wept over them. After this his brothers talked with him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">45:16</span> Now it was reported in the household of Pharaoh, “Joseph’s brothers have arrived.” It pleased Pharaoh and his servants. <span class="verse">45:17</span> Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Say to your brothers, ‘Do this: Load your animals and go to the land of Canaan! <span class="verse">45:18</span> Get your father and your households and come to me! Then I will give you the best land in Egypt and you will eat the best of the land.’ <span class="verse">45:19</span> You are also commanded to say, ‘Do this: Take for yourselves wagons from the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives. Bring your father and come. <span class="verse">45:20</span> Don’t worry about your belongings, for the best of all the land of Egypt will be yours.’”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">45:21</span> So the sons of Israel did as he said. Joseph gave them wagons as Pharaoh had instructed, and he gave them provisions for the journey. <span class="verse">45:22</span> He gave sets of clothes to each one of them, but to Benjamin he gave 300 pieces of silver and five sets of clothes. <span class="verse">45:23</span> To his father he sent the following: ten donkeys loaded with the best products of Egypt and ten female donkeys loaded with grain, food, and provisions for his father’s journey. <span class="verse">45:24</span> Then he sent his brothers on their way and they left. He said to them, “As you travel don’t be overcome with fear.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">45:25</span> So they went up from Egypt and came to their father Jacob in the land of Canaan. <span class="verse">45:26</span> They told him, “Joseph is still alive and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt!” Jacob was stunned, for he did not believe them. <span class="verse">45:27</span> But when they related to him everything Joseph had said to them, and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to transport him, their father Jacob’s spirit revived. <span class="verse">45:28</span> Then Israel said, “Enough! My son Joseph is still alive! I will go and see him before I die.” </p>

</body>
</html>