<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 18</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 18</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Bildad’s Second Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:1</span> Then Bildad the Shuhite answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:2</span> “How long until you make an end of words? </p>
<p class="poetry">You must consider, and then we can talk. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:3</span> Why should we be regarded as beasts,</p>
<p class="poetry">and considered stupid in your sight? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:4</span> You who tear yourself to pieces in your anger,</p>
<p class="poetry">will the earth be abandoned for your sake?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or will a rock be moved from its place? </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">18:5</span> “Yes, the lamp of the wicked is extinguished;</p>
<p class="poetry">his flame of fire does not shine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:6</span> The light in his tent grows dark;</p>
<p class="poetry">his lamp above him is extinguished. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:7</span> His vigorous steps are restricted, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his own counsel throws him down. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:8</span> For he has been thrown into a net by his feet </p>
<p class="poetry">and he wanders into a mesh. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:9</span> A trap seizes him by the heel;</p>
<p class="poetry">a snare grips him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:10</span> A rope is hidden for him on the ground</p>
<p class="poetry">and a trap for him lies on the path. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:11</span> Terrors frighten him on all sides</p>
<p class="poetry">and dog his every step. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:12</span> Calamity is hungry for him, </p>
<p class="poetry">and misfortune is ready at his side. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:13</span> It eats away parts of his skin; </p>
<p class="poetry">the most terrible death devours his limbs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:14</span> He is dragged from the security of his tent, </p>
<p class="poetry">and marched off to the king of terrors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:15</span> Fire resides in his tent; </p>
<p class="poetry">over his residence burning sulfur is scattered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:16</span> Below his roots dry up,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his branches wither above. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:17</span> His memory perishes from the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">he has no name in the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:18</span> He is driven from light into darkness</p>
<p class="poetry">and is banished from the world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:19</span> He has neither children nor descendants among his people,</p>
<p class="poetry">no survivor in those places he once stayed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:20</span> People of the west are appalled at his fate; </p>
<p class="poetry">people of the east are seized with horror, saying, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:21</span> ‘Surely such is the residence of an evil man;</p>
<p class="poetry">and this is the place of one who has not known God.’” </p>

</body>
</html>