<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Romans 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Therefore what advantage does the Jew have, or what is the value of circumcision? <span class="verse">3:2</span> Actually, there are many advantages. First of all, the Jews were entrusted with the oracles of God. <span class="verse">3:3</span> What then? If some were unfaithful, their unfaithfulness will not nullify God’s faithfulness, will it? <span class="verse">3:4</span> Absolutely not! Let God be proven true, and every human being shown up as a liar, just as it is written: “<b><i>so that you will be justified</i></b> <b><i>in</i> <i>your words and will prevail when you are judged</i></b>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:5</span> But if our unrighteousness demonstrates the righteousness of God, what shall we say? The God who inflicts wrath is not unrighteous, is he? (I am speaking in human terms.) <span class="verse">3:6</span> Absolutely not! For otherwise how could God judge the world? <span class="verse">3:7</span> For if by my lie the truth of God enhances his glory, why am I still actually being judged as a sinner? <span class="verse">3:8</span> And why not say, “Let us do evil so that good may come of it”?—as some who slander us allege that we say. (Their condemnation is deserved!) </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condemnation of the World</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:9</span> What then? Are we better off? Certainly not, for we have already charged that Jews and Greeks alike are all under sin, <span class="verse">3:10</span> just as it is written: </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>There is no one righteous, not even one</b></i>,</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> <i><b>there is no one who understands</b></i>,</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>there is no one who seeks God</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> <i><b>All have turned away</b></i>,</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>together they have become worthless;</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>there is no one who shows kindness, not even one.</b></i>” </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> “<i><b>Their throats are open graves</b>,</i> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>they deceive with their tongues</b>,</i></p>
<p class="otpoetry"> <i><b>the poison of asps is under their lips</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> “<b><i>Their mouths are</i></b> <i><b>full of cursing and bitterness</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> “<i><b>Their feet are swift to shed blood</b>,</i> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> <i><b>ruin and misery are in their paths</b>,</i> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> <i><b>and the way of peace they have not known</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> “<i><b>There is no fear of God before their eyes</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:19</span> Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world may be held accountable to God. <span class="verse">3:20</span> For <i>no one is declared righteous before him</i> by the works of the law, for through the law comes the knowledge of sin. <span class="verse">3:21</span> But now apart from the law the righteousness of God (although it is attested by the law and the prophets) has been disclosed— <span class="verse">3:22</span> namely, the righteousness of God through the faithfulness of Jesus Christ for all who believe. For there is no distinction, <span class="verse">3:23</span> for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God. <span class="verse">3:24</span> But they are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">3:25</span> God publicly displayed him at his death as the mercy seat accessible through faith. This was to demonstrate his righteousness, because God in his forbearance had passed over the sins previously committed. <span class="verse">3:26</span> This was also to demonstrate his righteousness in the present time, so that he would be just and the justifier of the one who lives because of Jesus’ faithfulness. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:27</span> Where, then, is boasting? It is excluded! By what principle? Of works? No, but by the principle of faith! <span class="verse">3:28</span> For we consider that a person is declared righteous by faith apart from the works of the law. <span class="verse">3:29</span> Or is God the God of the Jews only? Is he not the God of the Gentiles too? Yes, of the Gentiles too! <span class="verse">3:30</span> Since God is one, he will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through faith. <span class="verse">3:31</span> Do we then nullify the law through faith? Absolutely not! Instead we uphold the law. </p>

</body>
</html>