<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Kings 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Kings<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elijah Makes a Swift Departure</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Just before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> took Elijah up to heaven in a windstorm, Elijah and Elisha were traveling from Gilgal. <span class="verse">2:2</span> Elijah told Elisha, “Stay here, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has sent me to Bethel.” But Elisha said, “As certainly as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethel. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Some members of the prophetic guild in Bethel came out to Elisha and said, “Do you know that today the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is going to take your master from you?” He answered, “Yes, I know. Be quiet.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> Elijah said to him, “Elisha, stay here, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has sent me to Jericho.” But he replied, “As certainly as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So they went to Jericho. <span class="verse">2:5</span> Some members of the prophetic guild in Jericho approached Elisha and said, “Do you know that today the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is going to take your master from you?” He answered, “Yes, I know. Be quiet.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:6</span> Elijah said to him, “Stay here, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has sent me to the Jordan.” But he replied, “As certainly as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lives and as you live, I will not leave you.” So they traveled on together. <span class="verse">2:7</span> The fifty members of the prophetic guild went and stood opposite them at a distance, while Elijah and Elisha stood by the Jordan. <span class="verse">2:8</span> Elijah took his cloak, folded it up, and hit the water with it. The water divided, and the two of them crossed over on dry ground. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:9</span> When they had crossed over, Elijah said to Elisha, “What can I do for you, before I am taken away from you?” Elisha answered, “May I receive a double portion of the prophetic spirit that energizes you?” <span class="verse">2:10</span> Elijah replied, “That’s a difficult request! If you see me taken from you, may it be so, but if you don’t, it will not happen.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> As they were walking along and talking, suddenly a fiery chariot pulled by fiery horses appeared. They went between Elijah and Elisha, and Elijah went up to heaven in a windstorm. <span class="verse">2:12</span> While Elisha was watching, he was crying out, “My father, my father! The chariot and horsemen of Israel!” Then he could no longer see him. He grabbed his clothes and tore them in two. <span class="verse">2:13</span> He picked up Elijah’s cloak, which had fallen off him, and went back and stood on the shore of the Jordan. <span class="verse">2:14</span> He took the cloak that had fallen off Elijah, hit the water with it, and said, “Where is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of Elijah?” When he hit the water, it divided and Elisha crossed over.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:15</span> When the members of the prophetic guild in Jericho, who were standing at a distance, saw him do this, they said, “The spirit that energized Elijah rests upon Elisha.” They went to meet him and bowed down to the ground before him. <span class="verse">2:16</span> They said to him, “Look, there are fifty capable men with your servants. Let them go and look for your master, for the wind sent from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> may have carried him away and dropped him on one of the hills or in one of the valleys.” But Elisha replied, “Don’t send them out.” <span class="verse">2:17</span> But they were so insistent that he became embarrassed. So he said, “Send them out.” They sent the fifty men out, and they looked for three days, but could not find Elijah. <span class="verse">2:18</span> When they came back, Elisha was staying in Jericho. He said to them, “Didn’t I tell you, ‘Don’t go’?” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elisha Demonstrates His Authority</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:19</span> The men of the city said to Elisha, “Look, the city has a good location, as our master can see. But the water is bad and the land doesn’t produce crops.” <span class="verse">2:20</span> Elisha said, “Get me a new jar and put some salt in it.” So they got it. <span class="verse">2:21</span> He went out to the spring and threw the salt in. Then he said, “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said, ‘I have purified this water. It will no longer cause death or fail to produce crops.’” <span class="verse">2:22</span> The water has been pure to this very day, just as Elisha prophesied. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:23</span> He went up from there to Bethel. As he was traveling up the road, some young boys came out of the city and made fun of him, saying, “Go on up, baldy! Go on up, baldy!” <span class="verse">2:24</span> When he turned around and saw them, he called God’s judgment down on them. Two female bears came out of the woods and ripped forty-two of the boys to pieces. <span class="verse">2:25</span> From there he traveled to Mount Carmel and then back to Samaria. </p>

</body>
</html>