<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Habakkuk 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Habakkuk<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Habakkuk’s Vision of the Divine Warrior</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> This is a prayer of Habakkuk the prophet: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I have heard the report of what you did; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am awed, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, by what you accomplished. </p>
<p class="poetry">In our time repeat those deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">in our time reveal them again. </p>
<p class="poetry">But when you cause turmoil, remember to show us mercy! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> God comes from Teman, </p>
<p class="poetry">the Holy One from Mount Paran. <i>Selah</i>. </p>
<p class="poetry">His splendor has covered the skies, </p>
<p class="poetry">the earth is full of his glory. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> His brightness will be as lightning; </p>
<p class="poetry">a two-pronged lightning bolt flashing from his hand. </p>
<p class="poetry">This is the outward display of his power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> Plague will go before him;</p>
<p class="poetry">pestilence will march right behind him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> He took his battle position and shook the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">with a mere look he frightened the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">The ancient mountains disintegrated; </p>
<p class="poetry">the primeval hills were flattened.</p>
<p class="poetry">His are ancient roads. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> I saw the tents of Cushan overwhelmed by trouble; </p>
<p class="poetry">the tent curtains of the land of Midian were shaking. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> Was the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> mad at the rivers?</p>
<p class="poetry">Were you angry with the rivers?</p>
<p class="poetry">Were you enraged at the sea? </p>
<p class="poetry">Such that you would climb into your horse-drawn chariots, </p>
<p class="poetry">your victorious chariots? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Your bow is ready for action; </p>
<p class="poetry">you commission your arrows. <i>Selah</i>.</p>
<p class="poetry">You cause flash floods on the earth’s surface. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> When the mountains see you, they shake.</p>
<p class="poetry">The torrential downpour sweeps through. </p>
<p class="poetry">The great deep shouts out;</p>
<p class="poetry">it lifts its hands high. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> The sun and moon stand still in their courses; </p>
<p class="poetry">the flash of your arrows drives them away, </p>
<p class="poetry">the bright light of your lightning-quick spear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> You furiously stomp on the earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">you angrily trample down the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> You march out to deliver your people,</p>
<p class="poetry">to deliver your special servant. </p>
<p class="poetry">You strike the leader of the wicked nation, </p>
<p class="poetry">laying him open from the lower body to the neck. <i>Selah</i>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> You pierce the heads of his warriors with a spear. </p>
<p class="poetry">They storm forward to scatter us; </p>
<p class="poetry">they shout with joy as if they were plundering the poor with no opposition. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> But you trample on the sea with your horses,</p>
<p class="poetry">on the surging, raging waters. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Habakkuk Declares His Confidence</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> I listened and my stomach churned; </p>
<p class="poetry">the sound made my lips quiver.</p>
<p class="poetry">My frame went limp, as if my bones were decaying, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I shook as I tried to walk. </p>
<p class="poetry">I long for the day of distress</p>
<p class="poetry">to come upon the people who attack us.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> When the fig tree does not bud,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there are no grapes on the vines;</p>
<p class="poetry">when the olive trees do not produce </p>
<p class="poetry">and the fields yield no crops; </p>
<p class="poetry">when the sheep disappear from the pen</p>
<p class="poetry">and there are no cattle in the stalls— </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> I will rejoice because of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will be happy because of the God who delivers me!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is my source of strength. </p>
<p class="poetry">He gives me the agility of a deer; </p>
<p class="poetry">he enables me to negotiate the rugged terrain. </p>
<p class="bodytext">(This prayer is for the song leader. It is to be accompanied by stringed instruments.) </p>

</body>
</html>