<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Samuel 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Samuel<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Seeks a King</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> In his old age Samuel appointed his sons as judges over Israel. <span class="verse">8:2</span> The name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second son was Abijah. They were judges in Beer Sheba. <span class="verse">8:3</span> But his sons did not follow his ways. Instead, they made money dishonestly, accepted bribes, and perverted justice. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:4</span> So all the elders of Israel gathered together and approached Samuel at Ramah. <span class="verse">8:5</span> They said to him, “Look, you are old, and your sons don’t follow your ways. So now appoint over us a king to lead us, just like all the other nations have.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:6</span> But this request displeased Samuel, for they said, “Give us a king to lead us.” So Samuel prayed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">8:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Samuel, “Do everything the people request of you. For it is not you that they have rejected, but it is me that they have rejected as their king. <span class="verse">8:8</span> Just as they have done from the day that I brought them up from Egypt until this very day, they have rejected me and have served other gods. This is what they are also doing to you. <span class="verse">8:9</span> So now do as they say. But you must warn them and make them aware of the policies of the king who will rule over them.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:10</span> So Samuel spoke all the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s words to the people who were asking him for a king. <span class="verse">8:11</span> He said, “Here are the policies of the king who will rule over you: He will conscript your sons and put them in his chariot forces and in his cavalry; they will run in front of his chariot. <span class="verse">8:12</span> He will appoint for himself leaders of thousands and leaders of fifties, as well as those who plow his ground, reap his harvest, and make his weapons of war and his chariot equipment. <span class="verse">8:13</span> He will take your daughters to be ointment makers, cooks, and bakers. <span class="verse">8:14</span> He will take your best fields, vineyards, and olive groves, and give them to his own servants. <span class="verse">8:15</span> He will demand a tenth of your seed and of the produce of your vineyards and give it to his administrators and his servants. <span class="verse">8:16</span> He will take your male and female servants, as well as your best cattle and your donkeys, and assign them for his own use. <span class="verse">8:17</span> He will demand a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves will be his servants. <span class="verse">8:18</span> In that day you will cry out because of your king whom you have chosen for yourselves, but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> won’t answer you in that day.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:19</span> But the people refused to heed Samuel’s warning. Instead they said, “No! There will be a king over us! <span class="verse">8:20</span> We will be like all the other nations. Our king will judge us and lead us and fight our battles.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:21</span> So Samuel listened to everything the people said and then reported it to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">8:22</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Samuel, “Do as they say and install a king over them.” Then Samuel said to the men of Israel, “Each of you go back to his own city.” </p>

</body>
</html>