<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 27</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Lament for Tyre</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">27:2</span> “You, son of man, sing a lament for Tyre. <span class="verse">27:3</span> Say to Tyre, who sits at the entrance of the sea, merchant to the peoples on many coasts, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“‘O Tyre, you have said, “I am perfectly beautiful.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:4</span>  Your borders are in the heart of the seas;</p>
<p class="poetry">your builders have perfected your beauty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:5</span> They crafted all your planks out of fir trees from Senir; </p>
<p class="poetry">they took a cedar from Lebanon to make your mast. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:6</span> They made your oars from oaks of Bashan;</p>
<p class="poetry">they made your deck with cypress wood from the coasts of Cyprus. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:7</span> Fine linen from Egypt, woven with patterns, was used for your sail</p>
<p class="poetry">to serve as your banner;</p>
<p class="poetry">blue and purple from the coastlands of Elishah were used for your deck’s awning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:8</span> The leaders of Sidon and Arvad were your rowers;</p>
<p class="poetry">your skilled men, O Tyre, were your captains. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:9</span> The elders of Gebal and her skilled men were within you, mending cracks; </p>
<p class="poetry">all the ships of the sea and their mariners were within you to trade for your merchandise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:10</span> Men of Persia, Lud, and Put were in your army, men of war.</p>
<p class="poetry">They hung shield and helmet on you; they gave you your splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:11</span> The Arvadites joined your army on your walls all around,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the Gammadites were in your towers. </p>
<p class="poetry">They hung their quivers on your walls all around; </p>
<p class="poetry">they perfected your beauty. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:12</span> “‘Tarshish was your trade partner because of your abundant wealth; they exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for your products. <span class="verse">27:13</span> Javan, Tubal, and Meshech were your clients; they exchanged slaves and bronze items for your merchandise. <span class="verse">27:14</span> Beth Togarmah exchanged horses, chargers, and mules for your products. <span class="verse">27:15</span> The Dedanites were your clients. Many coastlands were your customers; they paid you with ivory tusks and ebony. <span class="verse">27:16</span> Edom was your trade partner because of the abundance of your goods; they exchanged turquoise, purple, embroidered work, fine linen, coral, and rubies for your products. <span class="verse">27:17</span> Judah and the land of Israel were your clients; they traded wheat from Minnith, millet, honey, olive oil, and balm for your merchandise. <span class="verse">27:18</span> Damascus was your trade partner because of the abundance of your goods and of all your wealth: wine from Helbon, white wool from Zahar, <span class="verse">27:19</span> and casks of wine from Izal they exchanged for your products. Wrought iron, cassia, and sweet cane were among your merchandise. <span class="verse">27:20</span> Dedan was your client in saddlecloths for riding. <span class="verse">27:21</span> Arabia and all the princes of Kedar were your trade partners; for lambs, rams, and goats they traded with you. <span class="verse">27:22</span> The merchants of Sheba and Raamah engaged in trade with you; they traded the best kinds of spices along with precious stones and gold for your products. <span class="verse">27:23</span> Haran, Kanneh, Eden, merchants from Sheba, Asshur, and Kilmad were your clients. <span class="verse">27:24</span> They traded with you choice garments, purple clothes and embroidered work, and multicolored carpets bound and reinforced with cords; these were among your merchandise. <span class="verse">27:25</span> The ships of Tarshish were the transports for your merchandise. </p>
<p class="poetry">“‘So you were filled and weighed down in the heart of the seas. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:26</span> Your rowers have brought you into surging waters.</p>
<p class="poetry">The east wind has wrecked you in the heart of the seas. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:27</span> Your wealth, products, and merchandise, your sailors and captains, </p>
<p class="poetry">your ship’s carpenters, your merchants, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all your fighting men within you, </p>
<p class="poetry">along with all your crew who are in you,</p>
<p class="poetry">will fall into the heart of the seas on the day of your downfall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:28</span> At the sound of your captains’ cries the waves will surge; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:29</span> They will descend from their ships—all who handle the oar, </p>
<p class="poetry">the sailors and all the sea captains—they will stand on the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:30</span> They will lament loudly over you and cry bitterly. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will throw dust on their heads and roll in the ashes; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:31</span> they will tear out their hair because of you and put on sackcloth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they will weep bitterly over you with intense mourning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:32</span> As they wail they will lament over you, chanting:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Who was like Tyre, like a tower in the midst of the sea?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:33</span> When your products went out from the seas,</p>
<p class="poetry">you satisfied many peoples;</p>
<p class="poetry">with the abundance of your wealth and merchandise</p>
<p class="poetry">you enriched the kings of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:34</span> Now you are wrecked by the seas, in the depths of the waters;</p>
<p class="poetry">your merchandise and all your company have sunk along with you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:35</span> All the inhabitants of the coastlands are shocked at you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their kings are horribly afraid—their faces are troubled.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">27:36</span> The traders among the peoples hiss at you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have become a horror, and will be no more.’” </p>

</body>
</html>