<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 42</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 42</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Survivors Ask the Lord for Advice but Refuse to Follow It</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:1</span> Then all the army officers, including Johanan son of Kareah and Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah and all the people of every class, went to the prophet Jeremiah. <span class="verse">42:2</span> They said to him, “Please grant our request and pray to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God for all those of us who are still left alive here. For, as you yourself can see, there are only a few of us left out of the many there were before. <span class="verse">42:3</span> Pray that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God will tell us where we should go and what we should do.” <span class="verse">42:4</span> The prophet Jeremiah answered them, “Agreed! I will indeed pray to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God as you have asked. I will tell you everything the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> replies in response to you. I will not keep anything back from you.” <span class="verse">42:5</span> They answered Jeremiah, “May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not do just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God sends you to tell us to do. <span class="verse">42:6</span> We will obey what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God to whom we are sending you tells us to do. It does not matter whether we like what he tells us or not. We will obey what he tells us to do so that things will go well for us.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:7</span> Ten days later the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to Jeremiah. <span class="verse">42:8</span> So Jeremiah summoned Johanan son of Kareah and all the army officers who were with him and all the people of every class. <span class="verse">42:9</span> Then Jeremiah said to them, “You sent me to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel to make your request known to him. Here is what he says to you: <span class="verse">42:10</span> ‘If you will only stay in this land, I will build you up. I will not tear you down. I will firmly plant you. I will not uproot you. For I am filled with sorrow because of the disaster that I have brought on you. <span class="verse">42:11</span> Do not be afraid of the king of Babylon whom you now fear. Do not be afraid of him because I will be with you to save you and to rescue you from his power. I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, affirm it! <span class="verse">42:12</span> I will have compassion on you so that he in turn will have mercy on you and allow you to return to your land.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:13</span> “You must not disobey the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God by saying, ‘We will not stay in this land.’ <span class="verse">42:14</span> You must not say, ‘No, we will not stay. Instead we will go and live in the land of Egypt where we will not face war, or hear the enemy’s trumpet calls, or starve for lack of food.’ <span class="verse">42:15</span> If you people who remain in Judah do that, then listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message. This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel, has said, ‘If you are so determined to go to Egypt that you go and settle there, <span class="verse">42:16</span> the wars you fear will catch up with you there in the land of Egypt. The starvation you are worried about will follow you there to Egypt. You will die there. <span class="verse">42:17</span> All the people who are determined to go and settle in Egypt will die from war, starvation, or disease. No one will survive or escape the disaster I will bring on them.’ <span class="verse">42:18</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘If you go to Egypt, I will pour out my wrath on you just as I poured out my anger and wrath on the citizens of Jerusalem. You will become an object of horror and ridicule, an example of those who have been cursed and that people use in pronouncing a curse. You will never see this place again.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">42:19</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has told you people who remain in Judah, ‘Do not go to Egypt.’ Be very sure of this: I warn you here and now. <span class="verse">42:20</span> You are making a fatal mistake. For you sent me to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God and asked me, ‘Pray to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God for us. Tell us what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God says, and we will do it.’ <span class="verse">42:21</span> This day I have told you what he said. But you do not want to obey the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God by doing what he sent me to tell you. <span class="verse">42:22</span> So now be very sure of this: You will die from war, starvation, or disease in the place where you want to go and live.” </p>

</body>
</html>