<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 31</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 31</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Words of Lemuel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">31:1</span> The words of King Lemuel, an oracle that his mother taught him:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:2</span> O my son, O son of my womb,</p>
<p class="poetry">O son of my vows, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:3</span> do not give your strength to women,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor your ways to that which ruins kings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:4</span> It is not for kings, O Lemuel,</p>
<p class="poetry">it is not for kings to drink wine, </p>
<p class="poetry">or for rulers to crave strong drink, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:5</span> lest they drink and forget what is decreed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and remove from all the poor their legal rights. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:6</span> Give strong drink to the one who is perishing, </p>
<p class="poetry">and wine to those who are bitterly distressed; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:7</span> let them drink and forget their poverty,</p>
<p class="poetry">and remember their misery no more. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:8</span> Open your mouth on behalf of those unable to speak, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the legal rights of all the dying. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:9</span> Open your mouth, judge in righteousness, </p>
<p class="poetry">and plead the cause of the poor and needy. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Wife of Noble Character </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:10</span> Who can find a wife of noble character? </p>
<p class="poetry">For her value is far more than rubies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:11</span> Her husband’s heart has trusted her,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he does not lack the dividends. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:12</span> She has rewarded him with good and not harm </p>
<p class="poetry">all the days of her life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:13</span> She sought out wool and flax,</p>
<p class="poetry">then worked happily with her hands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:14</span> She was like the merchant ships; </p>
<p class="poetry">she would bring in her food from afar. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:15</span> Then she rose while it was still night,</p>
<p class="poetry">and provided food for her household and a portion to her female servants.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:16</span> She considered a field and bought it;</p>
<p class="poetry">from her own income she planted a vineyard. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:17</span> She clothed herself in might,</p>
<p class="poetry">and she strengthened her arms. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:18</span> She perceived that her merchandise was good.</p>
<p class="poetry">Her lamp would not go out in the night. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:19</span> She extended her hands to the spool,</p>
<p class="poetry">and her hands grasped the spindle.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:20</span> She opened her hand to the poor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and extended her hands to the needy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:21</span> She would not fear for her household in winter, </p>
<p class="poetry">because all her household were clothed with scarlet, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:22</span> because she had made coverings for herself; </p>
<p class="poetry">and because her clothing was fine linen and purple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:23</span> Her husband is well-known in the city gate </p>
<p class="poetry">when he sits with the elders of the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:24</span> She made linen garments then sold them,</p>
<p class="poetry">and traded belts to the merchants; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:25</span> her clothing was strong and splendid;</p>
<p class="poetry">and she laughed at the time to come.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:26</span> She has opened her mouth with wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">with loving instruction on her tongue. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:27</span> Watching over the ways of her household,</p>
<p class="poetry">she would not eat the bread of idleness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:28</span> Her children have risen and called her blessed;</p>
<p class="poetry">her husband also has praised her:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:29</span> “Many daughters have done valiantly, </p>
<p class="poetry">but you have surpassed them all!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:30</span> Charm is deceitful and beauty is fleeting. </p>
<p class="poetry">A woman who fears the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> —she makes herself praiseworthy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:31</span> Give her credit for what she has accomplished, </p>
<p class="poetry">and let her works praise her in the city gates. </p>

</body>
</html>