<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 38</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 38</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle"><b>VI. The Divine Speeches (38:1—42:6)</b></p><p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s First Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:1</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> answered Job out of the whirlwind: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:2</span> “Who is this who darkens counsel </p>
<p class="poetry">with words without knowledge? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:3</span> Get ready for a difficult task like a man;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will question you</p>
<p class="poetry">and you will inform me.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s questions to Job</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:4</span> “Where were you </p>
<p class="poetry">when I laid the foundation of the earth?</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell me, if you possess understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:5</span> Who set its measurements—if you know—</p>
<p class="poetry">or who stretched a measuring line across it?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:6</span> On what were its bases set,</p>
<p class="poetry">or who laid its cornerstone—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:7</span> when the morning stars sang in chorus, </p>
<p class="poetry">and all the sons of God shouted for joy? </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">38:8</span> “Who shut up the sea with doors</p>
<p class="poetry">when it burst forth, coming out of the womb, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:9</span> when I made the storm clouds its garment,</p>
<p class="poetry">and thick darkness its swaddling band, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:10</span> when I prescribed its limits,</p>
<p class="poetry">and set in place its bolts and doors, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:11</span> when I said, ‘To here you may come </p>
<p class="poetry">and no farther, </p>
<p class="poetry">here your proud waves will be confined’? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:12</span> Have you ever in your life commanded the morning,</p>
<p class="poetry">or made the dawn know its place, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:13</span> that it might seize the corners of the earth, </p>
<p class="poetry">and shake the wicked out of it?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:14</span> The earth takes shape like clay under a seal; </p>
<p class="poetry">its features are dyed like a garment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:15</span> Then from the wicked the light is withheld,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the arm raised in violence is broken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:16</span> Have you gone to the springs that fill the sea, </p>
<p class="poetry">or walked about in the recesses of the deep? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:17</span> Have the gates of death been revealed to you? </p>
<p class="poetry">Have you seen the gates of deepest darkness? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:18</span> Have you considered the vast expanses of the earth?</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell me, if you know it all. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">38:19</span> “In what direction does light reside,</p>
<p class="poetry">and darkness, where is its place, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:20</span> that you may take them to their borders</p>
<p class="poetry">and perceive the pathways to their homes? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:21</span> You know, for you were born before them; </p>
<p class="poetry">and the number of your days is great! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:22</span> Have you entered the storehouse of the snow,</p>
<p class="poetry">or seen the armory of the hail, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:23</span> which I reserve for the time of trouble,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the day of war and battle? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:24</span> In what direction is lightning dispersed,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the east winds scattered over the earth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:25</span> Who carves out a channel for the heavy rains,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a path for the rumble of thunder, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:26</span> to cause it to rain on an uninhabited land, </p>
<p class="poetry">a wilderness where there are no human beings, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:27</span> to satisfy a devastated and desolate land,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to cause it to sprout with vegetation? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:28</span> Does the rain have a father,</p>
<p class="poetry">or who has fathered the drops of the dew? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:29</span> From whose womb does the ice emerge,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the frost from the sky, who gives birth to it,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:30</span> when the waters become hard like stone,</p>
<p class="poetry">when the surface of the deep is frozen solid? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:31</span> Can you tie the bands of the Pleiades,</p>
<p class="poetry">or release the cords of Orion? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:32</span> Can you lead out </p>
<p class="poetry">the constellations in their seasons,</p>
<p class="poetry">or guide the Bear with its cubs? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:33</span> Do you know the laws of the heavens,</p>
<p class="poetry">or can you set up their rule over the earth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:34</span> Can you raise your voice to the clouds</p>
<p class="poetry">so that a flood of water covers you? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:35</span> Can you send out lightning bolts, and they go?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will they say to you, ‘Here we are’?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:36</span> Who has put wisdom in the heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">or has imparted understanding to the mind?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:37</span> Who by wisdom can count the clouds,</p>
<p class="poetry">and who can tip over the water jars of heaven, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:38</span> when the dust hardens into a mass,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the clumps of earth stick together? </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">38:39</span> “Do you hunt prey for the lioness,</p>
<p class="poetry">and satisfy the appetite of the lions </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:40</span> when they crouch in their dens,</p>
<p class="poetry">when they wait in ambush in the thicket? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:41</span> Who prepares prey for the raven,</p>
<p class="poetry">when its young cry out to God</p>
<p class="poetry">and wander about for lack of food? </p>

</body>
</html>