<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Romans 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Submission to Civil Government</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except by God’s appointment, and the authorities that exist have been instituted by God. <span class="verse">13:2</span> So the person who resists such authority resists the ordinance of God, and those who resist will incur judgment <span class="verse">13:3</span> (for rulers cause no fear for good conduct but for bad). Do you desire not to fear authority? Do good and you will receive its commendation<span class="verse">13:4</span> because it is God’s servant for your well-being. But be afraid if you do wrong because government does not bear the sword for nothing. It is God’s servant to administer punishment on the person who does wrong. <span class="verse">13:5</span> Therefore it is necessary to be in subjection, not only because of the wrath of the authorities but also because of your conscience. <span class="verse">13:6</span> For this reason you also pay taxes, for the authorities are God’s servants devoted to governing. <span class="verse">13:7</span> Pay everyone what is owed: taxes to whom taxes are due, revenue to whom revenue is due, respect to whom respect is due, honor to whom honor is due. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Love Neighbors</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:8</span> Owe no one anything, except to love one another, for the one who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law. <span class="verse">13:9</span> For the commandments, “<i><b>Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not covet</b>,</i>” (and if there is any other commandment) are summed up in this, “<b><i>Love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>.” <span class="verse">13:10</span> Love does no wrong to a neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfillment of the law. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Motivation to Godly Conduct</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:11</span> And do this because we know the time, that it is already the hour for us to awake from sleep, for our salvation is now nearer than when we became believers. <span class="verse">13:12</span> The night has advanced toward dawn; the day is near. So then we must lay aside the works of darkness, and put on the weapons of light. <span class="verse">13:13</span> Let us live decently as in the daytime, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and sensuality, not in discord and jealousy. <span class="verse">13:14</span> Instead, put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to arouse its desires. </p>

</body>
</html>