<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel is Guilty of Fertility Cult Worship</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:1</span> Israel was a fertile vine</p>
<p class="poetry">that yielded fruit.</p>
<p class="poetry">As his fruit multiplied,</p>
<p class="poetry">he multiplied altars to Baal. </p>
<p class="poetry">As his land prospered,</p>
<p class="poetry">they adorned the fertility pillars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:2</span> Their hearts are slipping;</p>
<p class="poetry">soon they will be punished for their guilt.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will break their altars;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will completely destroy their fertility pillars. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Punish Israel by Removing Its Kings</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:3</span> Very soon they will say, “We have no king</p>
<p class="poetry">since we did not fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">But what can a king do for us anyway?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:4</span> They utter empty words, </p>
<p class="poetry">taking false oaths and making empty agreements.</p>
<p class="poetry">Therefore legal disputes sprout up</p>
<p class="poetry">like poisonous weeds in the furrows of a plowed field. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Calf Idol and Idolaters of Samaria Will Be Exiled</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:5</span> The inhabitants of Samaria will lament over the calf idol of Beth Aven. </p>
<p class="poetry">Its people will mourn over it;</p>
<p class="poetry">its idolatrous priests will wail over it, </p>
<p class="poetry">because its splendor will be taken from them into exile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:6</span> Even the calf idol will be carried to Assyria,</p>
<p class="poetry">as tribute for the great king. </p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim will be disgraced;</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel will be put to shame because of its wooden idol. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:7</span> Samaria and its king will be carried off </p>
<p class="poetry">like a twig on the surface of the waters. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:8</span> The high places of the “House of Wickedness” will be destroyed;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is the place where Israel sins.</p>
<p class="poetry">Thorns and thistles will grow up over its altars.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then they will say to the mountains, “Cover us!”</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the hills, “Fall on us!”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Failure to Learn from the Sin and Judgment of Gibeah</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:9</span> O Israel, you have sinned since the time of Gibeah, </p>
<p class="poetry">and there you have remained.</p>
<p class="poetry">Did not war overtake the evildoers in Gibeah? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:10</span> When I please, I will discipline them; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will gather nations together to attack them, </p>
<p class="poetry">to bind them in chains for their two sins. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Fertility Imagery: Plowing, Sowing, and Reaping</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:11</span> Ephraim was a well-trained heifer who loved to thresh grain;</p>
<p class="poetry">I myself put a fine yoke on her neck.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will harness Ephraim.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let Judah plow! </p>
<p class="poetry">Let Jacob break up the unplowed ground for himself!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:12</span> Sow righteousness for yourselves,</p>
<p class="poetry">reap unfailing love.</p>
<p class="poetry">Break up the unplowed ground for yourselves,</p>
<p class="poetry">for it is time to seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">until he comes and showers deliverance on you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:13</span> But you have plowed wickedness;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have reaped injustice;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have eaten the fruit of deception.</p>
<p class="poetry">Because you have depended on your chariots; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have relied on your many warriors. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Bethel Will Be Destroyed Like Beth Arbel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:14</span> The roar of battle will rise against your people;</p>
<p class="poetry">all your fortresses will be devastated,</p>
<p class="poetry">just as Shalman devastated Beth Arbel on the day of battle,</p>
<p class="poetry">when mothers were dashed to the ground with their children. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:15</span> So will it happen to you, O Bethel, </p>
<p class="poetry">because of your great wickedness!</p>
<p class="poetry">When that day dawns, </p>
<p class="poetry">the king of Israel will be destroyed. </p>

</body>
</html>