<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> I saw the Lord standing by the altar and he said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Strike the tops of the support pillars, so the thresholds shake!</p>
<p class="poetry">Knock them down on the heads of all the people, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will kill the survivors with the sword.</p>
<p class="poetry">No one will be able to run away; </p>
<p class="poetry">no one will be able to escape. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:2</span> Even if they could dig down into the netherworld, </p>
<p class="poetry">my hand would pull them up from there.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even if they could climb up to heaven,</p>
<p class="poetry">I would drag them down from there. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:3</span> Even if they were to hide on the top of Mount Carmel,</p>
<p class="poetry">I would hunt them down and take them from there.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even if they tried to hide from me at the bottom of the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">from there I would command the Sea Serpent to bite them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:4</span> Even when their enemies drive them into captivity, </p>
<p class="poetry">from there I will command the sword to kill them.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not let them out of my sight;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will experience disaster, not prosperity.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">9:5</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies will do this. </p>
<p class="poetry">He touches the earth and it dissolves; </p>
<p class="poetry">all who live on it mourn.</p>
<p class="poetry">The whole earth rises like the Nile River, </p>
<p class="poetry">and then grows calm like the Nile in Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:6</span> He builds the upper rooms of his palace in heaven</p>
<p class="poetry">and sets its foundation supports on the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry">He summons the water of the sea</p>
<p class="poetry">and pours it out on the earth’s surface.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is his name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:7</span> “You Israelites are just like the Ethiopians in my sight,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry">“Certainly I brought Israel up from the land of Egypt, </p>
<p class="poetry">but I also brought the Philistines from Caphtor and the Arameans from Kir. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:8</span> Look, the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is watching the sinful nation, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will destroy it from the face of the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">But I will not completely destroy the family of Jacob,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:9</span> “For look, I am giving a command</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will shake the family of Israel together with all the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">It will resemble a sieve being shaken, </p>
<p class="poetry">when not even a pebble falls to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:10</span> All the sinners among my people will die by the sword—</p>
<p class="poetry">the ones who say, ‘Disaster will not come near, it will not confront us.’</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Restoration of the Davidic Dynasty</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:11</span> “In that day I will rebuild the collapsing hut of David.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will seal its gaps,</p>
<p class="poetry">repair its ruins,</p>
<p class="poetry">and restore it to what it was like in days gone by. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:12</span> As a result they will conquer those left in Edom </p>
<p class="poetry">and all the nations subject to my rule.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who is about to do this, is speaking. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:13</span> “Be sure of this, the time is coming,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">“when the plowman will catch up to the reaper, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who stomps the grapes will overtake the planter. </p>
<p class="poetry">Juice will run down the slopes; </p>
<p class="poetry">it will flow down all the hillsides. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:14</span> I will bring back my people, Israel; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will rebuild the cities lying in rubble and settle down. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will plant vineyards and drink the wine they produce; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will grow orchards and eat the fruit they produce. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:15</span> I will plant them on their land,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they will never again be uprooted from the land I have given them,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. </p>

</body>
</html>