<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Matthew 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:1</span> Now after the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb. <span class="verse">28:2</span> Suddenly there was a severe earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descending from heaven came and rolled away the stone and sat on it. <span class="verse">28:3</span> His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow. <span class="verse">28:4</span> The guards were shaken and became like dead men because they were so afraid of him. <span class="verse">28:5</span> But the angel said to the women, “Do not be afraid; I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified. <span class="verse">28:6</span> He is not here, for he has been raised, just as he said. Come and see the place where he was lying. <span class="verse">28:7</span> Then go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has been raised from the dead. He is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there.’ Listen, I have told you!” <span class="verse">28:8</span> So they left the tomb quickly, with fear and great joy, and ran to tell his disciples. <span class="verse">28:9</span> But Jesus met them, saying, “Greetings!” They came to him, held on to his feet and worshiped him. <span class="verse">28:10</span> Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee. They will see me there.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Guards’ Report</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:11</span> While they were going, some of the guard went into the city and told the chief priests everything that had happened. <span class="verse">28:12</span> After they had assembled with the elders and formed a plan, they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers, <span class="verse">28:13</span> telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came at night and stole his body while we were asleep.’ <span class="verse">28:14</span> If this matter is heard before the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.” <span class="verse">28:15</span> So they took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story is told among the Jews to this day. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Great Commission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:16</span> So the eleven disciples went to Galilee to the mountain Jesus had designated. <span class="verse">28:17</span> When they saw him, they worshiped him, but some doubted. <span class="verse">28:18</span> Then Jesus came up and said to them, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. <span class="verse">28:19</span> Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, <span class="verse">28:20</span> teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And remember, I am with you always, to the end of the age.” </p>

</body>
</html>