<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Balaam Blesses Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span>  Balaam said to Balak, “Build me seven altars here, and prepare for me here seven bulls and seven rams.” <span class="verse">23:2</span> So Balak did just as Balaam had said. Balak and Balaam then offered on each altar a bull and a ram. <span class="verse">23:3</span> Balaam said to Balak, “Station yourself by your burnt offering, and I will go off; perhaps the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will come to meet me, and whatever he reveals to me I will tell you.” Then he went to a deserted height. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:4</span> Then God met Balaam, who said to him, “I have prepared seven altars, and I have offered on each altar a bull and a ram.” <span class="verse">23:5</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> put a message in Balaam’s mouth and said, “Return to Balak, and speak what I tell you.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:6</span> So he returned to him, and he was still standing by his burnt offering, he and all the princes of Moab. <span class="verse">23:7</span> Then Balaam uttered his oracle, saying, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Balak, the king of Moab, brought me from Aram, </p>
<p class="poetry">out of the mountains of the east, saying, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Come, pronounce a curse on Jacob for me; </p>
<p class="poetry">come, denounce Israel.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:8</span> How can I curse one whom God has not cursed, </p>
<p class="poetry">or how can I denounce one whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has not denounced? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:9</span> For from the top of the rocks I see them; </p>
<p class="poetry">from the hills I watch them. </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, a nation that lives alone, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it will not be reckoned among the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:10</span> Who can count the dust of Jacob, </p>
<p class="poetry">or number the fourth part of Israel? </p>
<p class="poetry">Let me die the death of the upright, </p>
<p class="poetry">and let the end of my life be like theirs.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Balaam Relocates</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:11</span> Then Balak said to Balaam, “What have you done to me? I brought you to curse my enemies, but on the contrary you have only blessed them!” <span class="verse">23:12</span> Balaam replied, “Must I not be careful to speak what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has put in my mouth?” <span class="verse">23:13</span> Balak said to him, “Please come with me to another place from which you can observe them. You will see only a part of them, but you will not see all of them. Curse them for me from there.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:14</span> So Balak brought Balaam to the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, where he built seven altars and offered a bull and a ram on each altar. <span class="verse">23:15</span> And Balaam said to Balak, “Station yourself here by your burnt offering, while I meet the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> there.” <span class="verse">23:16</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> met Balaam and put a message in his mouth and said, “Return to Balak, and speak what I tell you.” <span class="verse">23:17</span> When Balaam came to him, he was still standing by his burnt offering, along with the princes of Moab. And Balak said to him, “What has the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoken?” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Balaam Prophesies Again</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:18</span> Balaam uttered his oracle, and said,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Rise up, Balak, and hear;</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen to me, son of Zippor: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:19</span> God is not a man, that he should lie,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor a human being, that he should change his mind.</p>
<p class="poetry">Has he said, and will he not do it?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or has he spoken, and will he not make it happen? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:20</span> Indeed, I have received a command to bless;</p>
<p class="poetry">he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:21</span> He has not looked on iniquity in Jacob, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor has he seen trouble in Israel.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God is with them;</p>
<p class="poetry">his acclamation as king is among them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:22</span> God brought them out of Egypt.</p>
<p class="poetry">They have, as it were, the strength of a wild bull. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:23</span> For there is no spell against Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor is there any divination against Israel.</p>
<p class="poetry">At this time it must be said of Jacob</p>
<p class="poetry">and of Israel, ‘Look at what God has done!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:24</span> Indeed, the people will rise up like a lioness,</p>
<p class="poetry">and like a lion raises himself up;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will not lie down until they eat their prey,</p>
<p class="poetry">and drink the blood of the slain.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Balaam Relocates Yet Again</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:25</span> Balak said to Balaam, “Neither curse them at all nor bless them at all!” <span class="verse">23:26</span> But Balaam replied to Balak, “Did I not tell you, ‘All that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> speaks, I must do’?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:27</span> Balak said to Balaam, “Come, please; I will take you to another place. Perhaps it will please God to let you curse them for me from there.” <span class="verse">23:28</span> So Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, that looks toward the wastelands. <span class="verse">23:29</span> Then Balaam said to Balak, “Build seven altars here for me, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams.” <span class="verse">23:30</span> So Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bull and a ram on each altar. </p>

</body>
</html>