<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) John 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Death of Lazarus</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> Now a certain man named Lazarus was sick. He was from Bethany, the village where Mary and her sister Martha lived. <span class="verse">11:2</span> (Now it was Mary who anointed the Lord with perfumed oil and wiped his feet dry with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.) <span class="verse">11:3</span> So the sisters sent a message to Jesus, “Lord, look, the one you love is sick.” <span class="verse">11:4</span> When Jesus heard this, he said, “This sickness will not lead to death, but to God’s glory, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.” <span class="verse">11:5</span> (Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:6</span> So when he heard that Lazarus was sick, he remained in the place where he was for two more days. <span class="verse">11:7</span> Then after this, he said to his disciples, “Let us go to Judea again.” <span class="verse">11:8</span> The disciples replied, “Rabbi, the Jewish leaders were just now trying to stone you to death! Are you going there again?” <span class="verse">11:9</span> Jesus replied, “Are there not twelve hours in a day? If anyone walks around in the daytime, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. <span class="verse">11:10</span> But if anyone walks around at night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:11</span> After he said this, he added, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep. But I am going there to awaken him.” <span class="verse">11:12</span> Then the disciples replied, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.” <span class="verse">11:13</span> (Now Jesus had been talking about his death, but they thought he had been talking about real sleep.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:14</span> Then Jesus told them plainly, “Lazarus has died, <span class="verse">11:15</span> and I am glad for your sake that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.” <span class="verse">11:16</span> So Thomas (called Didymus) said to his fellow disciples, “Let us go too, so that we may die with him.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Speaking with Martha and Mary</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:17</span> When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been in the tomb four days already. <span class="verse">11:18</span> (Now Bethany was less than two miles from Jerusalem, <span class="verse">11:19</span> so many of the Jewish people of the region had come to Martha and Mary to console them over the loss of their brother.) <span class="verse">11:20</span> So when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet him, but Mary was sitting in the house. <span class="verse">11:21</span> Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died. <span class="verse">11:22</span> But even now I know that whatever you ask from God, God will grant you.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:23</span> Jesus replied, “Your brother will come back to life again.” <span class="verse">11:24</span> Martha said, “I know that he will come back to life again in the resurrection at the last day.” <span class="verse">11:25</span> Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. The one who believes in me will live even if he dies, <span class="verse">11:26</span> and the one who lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?” <span class="verse">11:27</span> She replied, “Yes, Lord, I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God who comes into the world.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:28</span> And when she had said this, Martha went and called her sister Mary, saying privately, “The Teacher is here and is asking for you.” <span class="verse">11:29</span> So when Mary heard this, she got up quickly and went to him. <span class="verse">11:30</span> (Now Jesus had not yet entered the village, but was still in the place where Martha had come out to meet him.) <span class="verse">11:31</span> Then the people who were with Mary in the house consoling her saw her get up quickly and go out. They followed her, because they thought she was going to the tomb to weep there. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:32</span> Now when Mary came to the place where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said to him, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.” <span class="verse">11:33</span> When Jesus saw her weeping, and the people who had come with her weeping, he was intensely moved in spirit and greatly distressed. <span class="verse">11:34</span> He asked, “Where have you laid him?” They replied, “Lord, come and see.” <span class="verse">11:35</span> Jesus wept. <span class="verse">11:36</span> Thus the people who had come to mourn said, “Look how much he loved him!” <span class="verse">11:37</span> But some of them said, “This is the man who caused the blind man to see! Couldn’t he have done something to keep Lazarus from dying?” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lazarus Raised from the Dead</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:38</span> Jesus, intensely moved again, came to the tomb. (Now it was a cave, and a stone was placed across it.) <span class="verse">11:39</span> Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of the deceased, replied, “Lord, by this time the body will have a bad smell, because he has been buried four days.” <span class="verse">11:40</span> Jesus responded, “Didn’t I tell you that if you believe, you would see the glory of God?” <span class="verse">11:41</span> So they took away the stone. Jesus looked upward and said, “Father, I thank you that you have listened to me. <span class="verse">11:42</span> I knew that you always listen to me, but I said this for the sake of the crowd standing around here, that they may believe that you sent me.” <span class="verse">11:43</span> When he had said this, he shouted in a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!” <span class="verse">11:44</span> The one who had died came out, his feet and hands tied up with strips of cloth, and a cloth wrapped around his face. Jesus said to them, “Unwrap him and let him go.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Response of the Jewish Leaders</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:45</span> Then many of the people, who had come with Mary and had seen the things Jesus did, believed in him. <span class="verse">11:46</span> But some of them went to the Pharisees and reported to them what Jesus had done. <span class="verse">11:47</span> So the chief priests and the Pharisees called the council together and said, “What are we doing? For this man is performing many miraculous signs. <span class="verse">11:48</span> If we allow him to go on in this way, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away our sanctuary and our nation.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:49</span> Then one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said, “You know nothing at all! <span class="verse">11:50</span> You do not realize that it is more to your advantage to have one man die for the people than for the whole nation to perish.” <span class="verse">11:51</span> (Now he did not say this on his own, but because he was high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the Jewish nation, <span class="verse">11:52</span> and not for the Jewish nation only, but to gather together into one the children of God who are scattered.) <span class="verse">11:53</span> So from that day they planned together to kill him. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:54</span> Thus Jesus no longer went around publicly among the Judeans, but went away from there to the region near the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, and stayed there with his disciples. <span class="verse">11:55</span> Now the Jewish Feast of Passover was near, and many people went up to Jerusalem from the rural areas before the Passover to cleanse themselves ritually. <span class="verse">11:56</span> Thus they were looking for Jesus, and saying to one another as they stood in the temple courts, “What do you think? That he won’t come to the feast?” <span class="verse">11:57</span> (Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that anyone who knew where Jesus was should report it, so that they could arrest him.) </p>

</body>
</html>