<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 39</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 39</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Joseph and Potiphar’s Wife</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">39:1</span> Now Joseph had been brought down to Egypt. An Egyptian named Potiphar, an official of Pharaoh and the captain of the guard, purchased him from the Ishmaelites who had brought him there. <span class="verse">39:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was with Joseph. He was successful and lived in the household of his Egyptian master. <span class="verse">39:3</span> His master observed that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was with him and that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made everything he was doing successful. <span class="verse">39:4</span> So Joseph found favor in his sight and became his personal attendant. Potiphar appointed Joseph overseer of his household and put him in charge of everything he owned. <span class="verse">39:5</span> From the time Potiphar appointed him over his household and over all that he owned, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> blessed the Egyptian’s household for Joseph’s sake. The blessing of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was on everything that he had, both in his house and in his fields. <span class="verse">39:6</span> So Potiphar left everything he had in Joseph’s care; he gave no thought to anything except the food he ate. </p>
<p class="bodytext">Now Joseph was well built and good-looking. <span class="verse">39:7</span> Soon after these things, his master’s wife took notice of Joseph and said, “Come to bed with me.” <span class="verse">39:8</span> But he refused, saying to his master’s wife, “Look, my master does not give any thought to his household with me here, and everything that he owns he has put into my care. <span class="verse">39:9</span> There is no one greater in this household than I am. He has withheld nothing from me except you because you are his wife. So how could I do such a great evil and sin against God?” <span class="verse">39:10</span> Even though she continued to speak to Joseph day after day, he did not respond to her invitation to go to bed with her. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">39:11</span> One day he went into the house to do his work when none of the household servants were there in the house. <span class="verse">39:12</span> She grabbed him by his outer garment, saying, “Come to bed with me!” But he left his outer garment in her hand and ran outside. <span class="verse">39:13</span> When she saw that he had left his outer garment in her hand and had run outside, <span class="verse">39:14</span> she called for her household servants and said to them, “See, my husband brought in a Hebrew man to us to humiliate us. He tried to go to bed with me, but I screamed loudly. <span class="verse">39:15</span> When he heard me raise my voice and scream, he left his outer garment beside me and ran outside.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">39:16</span> So she laid his outer garment beside her until his master came home. <span class="verse">39:17</span> This is what she said to him: “That Hebrew slave you brought to us tried to humiliate me, <span class="verse">39:18</span> but when I raised my voice and screamed, he left his outer garment and ran outside.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">39:19</span> When his master heard his wife say, “This is the way your slave treated me,” he became furious. <span class="verse">39:20</span> Joseph’s master took him and threw him into the prison, the place where the king’s prisoners were confined. So he was there in the prison. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">39:21</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was with Joseph and showed him kindness. He granted him favor in the sight of the prison warden. <span class="verse">39:22</span> The warden put all the prisoners under Joseph’s care. He was in charge of whatever they were doing. <span class="verse">39:23</span> The warden did not concern himself with anything that was in Joseph’s care because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was with him and whatever he was doing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was making successful. </p>

</body>
</html>