<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Holy and the Profane</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> You are children of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. Do not cut yourselves or shave your forehead bald for the sake of the dead. <span class="verse">14:2</span> For you are a people holy to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. He has chosen you to be his people, prized above all others on the face of the earth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:3</span> You must not eat any forbidden thing. <span class="verse">14:4</span> These are the animals you may eat: the ox, the sheep, the goat, <span class="verse">14:5</span> the ibex, the gazelle, the deer, the wild goat, the antelope, the wild oryx, and the mountain sheep. <span class="verse">14:6</span> You may eat any animal that has hooves divided into two parts and that chews the cud. <span class="verse">14:7</span> However, you may not eat the following animals among those that chew the cud or those that have divided hooves: the camel, the hare, and the rock badger. (Although they chew the cud, they do not have divided hooves and are therefore ritually impure to you.) <span class="verse">14:8</span> Also, the pig is ritually impure to you; though it has divided hooves, it does not chew the cud. You may not eat their meat or even touch their remains. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:9</span> These you may eat from among water creatures: anything with fins and scales you may eat, <span class="verse">14:10</span> but whatever does not have fins and scales you may not eat; it is ritually impure to you.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:11</span> All ritually clean birds you may eat. <span class="verse">14:12</span> These are the ones you may not eat: the eagle, the vulture, the black vulture, <span class="verse">14:13</span> the kite, the black kite, the dayyah after its species, <span class="verse">14:14</span> every raven after its species, <span class="verse">14:15</span> the ostrich, the owl, the seagull, the falcon after its species, <span class="verse">14:16</span> the little owl, the long-eared owl, the white owl, <span class="verse">14:17</span> the jackdaw, the carrion vulture, the cormorant, <span class="verse">14:18</span> the stork, the heron after its species, the hoopoe, and the bat.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:19</span> And any swarming winged thing is impure to you—they may not be eaten. <span class="verse">14:20</span> You may eat any winged creature that is clean. <span class="verse">14:21</span> You may not eat any corpse, though you may give it to the resident foreigner who is living in your villages and he may eat it, or you may sell it to a foreigner. You are a people holy to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. Do not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Offering of Tithes</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:22</span> You must be certain to tithe all the produce of your seed that comes from the field year after year. <span class="verse">14:23</span> In the presence of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, in the place he chooses to locate his name, you must eat from the tithe of your grain, your new wine, your olive oil, and the firstborn of your herds and flocks, so that you may learn to revere the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God always. <span class="verse">14:24</span> When he blesses you, if the place where he chooses to locate his name is distant, <span class="verse">14:25</span> you may convert the tithe into money, secure the money, and travel to the place the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God chooses for himself. <span class="verse">14:26</span> Then you may spend the money however you wish for cattle, sheep, wine, beer, or whatever you desire. You and your household may eat there in the presence of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God and enjoy it. <span class="verse">14:27</span> As for the Levites in your villages, you must not ignore them, for they have no allotment or inheritance along with you. <span class="verse">14:28</span> At the end of every three years you must bring all the tithe of your produce, in that very year, and you must store it up in your villages. <span class="verse">14:29</span> Then the Levites (because they have no allotment or inheritance with you), the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows of your villages may come and eat their fill so that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God may bless you in all the work you do. </p>

</body>
</html>