<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Tyre</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:1</span> This is an oracle about Tyre:</p>
<p class="poetry">Wail, you large ships, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the port is too devastated to enter! </p>
<p class="poetry">From the land of Cyprus this news is announced to them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:2</span> Lament, you residents of the coast,</p>
<p class="poetry">you merchants of Sidon who travel over the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">whose agents sail over <span class="verse">23:3</span> the deep waters. </p>
<p class="poetry">Grain from the Shihor region, </p>
<p class="poetry">crops grown near the Nile she receives; </p>
<p class="poetry">she is the trade center of the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:4</span> Be ashamed, O Sidon, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the sea says this, O fortress of the sea:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I have not gone into labor </p>
<p class="poetry">or given birth;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have not raised young men</p>
<p class="poetry">or brought up young women.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:5</span> When the news reaches Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">they will be shaken by what has happened to Tyre. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:6</span> Travel to Tarshish!</p>
<p class="poetry">Wail, you residents of the coast! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:7</span> Is this really your boisterous city </p>
<p class="poetry">whose origins are in the distant past, </p>
<p class="poetry">and whose feet led her to a distant land to reside? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:8</span> Who planned this for royal Tyre, </p>
<p class="poetry">whose merchants are princes,</p>
<p class="poetry">whose traders are the dignitaries of the earth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies planned it—</p>
<p class="poetry">to dishonor the pride that comes from all her beauty, </p>
<p class="poetry">to humiliate all the dignitaries of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:10</span> Daughter Tarshish, travel back to your land, as one crosses the Nile;</p>
<p class="poetry">there is no longer any marketplace in Tyre. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> stretched out his hand over the sea, </p>
<p class="poetry">he shook kingdoms;</p>
<p class="poetry">he gave the order </p>
<p class="poetry">to destroy Canaan’s fortresses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:12</span> He said,</p>
<p class="poetry">“You will no longer celebrate,</p>
<p class="poetry">oppressed virgin daughter Sidon!</p>
<p class="poetry">Get up, travel to Cyprus,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you will find no relief there.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:13</span> Look at the land of the Chaldeans,</p>
<p class="poetry">these people who have lost their identity! </p>
<p class="poetry">The Assyrians have made it a home for wild animals.</p>
<p class="poetry">They erected their siege towers, </p>
<p class="poetry">demolished its fortresses,</p>
<p class="poetry">and turned it into a heap of ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:14</span> Wail, you large ships, </p>
<p class="poetry">for your fortress is destroyed! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:15</span> At that time Tyre will be forgotten for seventy years, the typical life span of a king. At the end of seventy years Tyre will try to attract attention again, like the prostitute in the popular song: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">23:16</span> “Take the harp,</p>
<p class="poetry">go through the city,</p>
<p class="poetry">forgotten prostitute!</p>
<p class="poetry">Play it well,</p>
<p class="poetry">play lots of songs,</p>
<p class="poetry">so you’ll be noticed.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:17</span> At the end of seventy years the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will revive Tyre. She will start making money again by selling her services to all the earth’s kingdoms. <span class="verse">23:18</span> Her profits and earnings will be set apart for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. They will not be stored up or accumulated, for her profits will be given to those who live in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s presence and will be used to purchase large quantities of food and beautiful clothes. </p>

</body>
</html>