<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 104</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 104</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:1</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, O my soul!</p>
<p class="poetry">O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my God, you are magnificent. </p>
<p class="poetry">You are robed in splendor and majesty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:2</span> He covers himself with light as if it were a garment.</p>
<p class="poetry">He stretches out the skies like a tent curtain, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:3</span> and lays the beams of the upper rooms of his palace on the rain clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry">He makes the clouds his chariot,</p>
<p class="poetry">and travels on the wings of the wind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:4</span> He makes the winds his messengers,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the flaming fire his attendant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:5</span> He established the earth on its foundations;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will never be moved. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:6</span> The watery deep covered it like a garment;</p>
<p class="poetry">the waters reached above the mountains. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:7</span> Your shout made the waters retreat;</p>
<p class="poetry">at the sound of your thunderous voice they hurried off—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:8</span> as the mountains rose up,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the valleys went down—</p>
<p class="poetry">to the place you appointed for them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:9</span> You set up a boundary for them that they could not cross,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that they would not cover the earth again. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:10</span> He turns springs into streams; </p>
<p class="poetry">they flow between the mountains. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:11</span> They provide water for all the animals in the field;</p>
<p class="poetry">the wild donkeys quench their thirst. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:12</span> The birds of the sky live beside them;</p>
<p class="poetry">they chirp among the bushes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:13</span> He waters the mountains from the upper rooms of his palace; </p>
<p class="poetry">the earth is full of the fruit you cause to grow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:14</span> He provides grass for the cattle,</p>
<p class="poetry">and crops for people to cultivate, </p>
<p class="poetry">so they can produce food from the ground, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:15</span> as well as wine that makes people glad, </p>
<p class="poetry">and olive oil to make their faces shine, </p>
<p class="poetry">as well as bread that sustains them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:16</span> The trees of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> receive all the rain they need, </p>
<p class="poetry">the cedars of Lebanon that he planted, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:17</span> where the birds make nests,</p>
<p class="poetry">near the evergreens in which the herons live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:18</span> The wild goats live in the high mountains; </p>
<p class="poetry">the rock badgers find safety in the cliffs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:19</span> He made the moon to mark the months, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the sun sets according to a regular schedule. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:20</span> You make it dark and night comes, </p>
<p class="poetry">during which all the beasts of the forest prowl around.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:21</span> The lions roar for prey,</p>
<p class="poetry">seeking their food from God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:22</span> When the sun rises, they withdraw</p>
<p class="poetry">and sleep in their dens. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:23</span> People then go out to do their work,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they labor until evening. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:24</span> How many living things you have made, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="poetry">You have exhibited great skill in making all of them; </p>
<p class="poetry">the earth is full of the living things you have made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:25</span> Over here is the deep, wide sea, </p>
<p class="poetry">which teems with innumerable swimming creatures, </p>
<p class="poetry">living things both small and large. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:26</span> The ships travel there,</p>
<p class="poetry">and over here swims the whale you made to play in it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:27</span> All your creatures wait for you</p>
<p class="poetry">to provide them with food on a regular basis. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:28</span> You give food to them and they receive it;</p>
<p class="poetry">you open your hand and they are filled with food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:29</span> When you ignore them, they panic. </p>
<p class="poetry">When you take away their life’s breath, </p>
<p class="poetry">they die and return to dust. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:30</span> When you send your life-giving breath, they are created,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you replenish the surface of the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:31</span> May the splendor of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> endure. </p>
<p class="poetry">May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> find pleasure in the living things he has made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:32</span> He looks down on the earth and it shakes;</p>
<p class="poetry">he touches the mountains and they start to smolder. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:33</span> I will sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> as long as I live;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praise to my God as long as I exist. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:34</span> May my thoughts be pleasing to him.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will rejoice in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">104:35</span> May sinners disappear from the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the wicked vanish.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, O my soul.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>