<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Luke 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Luke<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Sending of the Twelve Apostles </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> After Jesus called the twelve together, he gave them power and authority over all demons and to cure diseases, <span class="verse">9:2</span> and he sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick. <span class="verse">9:3</span> He said to them, “Take nothing for your journey—no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, and do not take an extra tunic. <span class="verse">9:4</span> Whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave the area. <span class="verse">9:5</span> Wherever they do not receive you, as you leave that town, shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.” <span class="verse">9:6</span> Then they departed and went throughout the villages, proclaiming the good news and healing people everywhere. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Herod’s Confusion about Jesus</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:7</span> Now Herod the tetrarch heard about everything that was happening, and he was thoroughly perplexed, because some people were saying that John had been raised from the dead, <span class="verse">9:8</span> while others were saying that Elijah had appeared, and still others that one of the prophets of long ago had risen. <span class="verse">9:9</span> Herod said, “I had John beheaded, but who is this about whom I hear such things?” So Herod wanted to learn about Jesus. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feeding of the Five Thousand </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:10</span> When the apostles returned, they told Jesus everything they had done. Then he took them with him and they withdrew privately to a town called Bethsaida. <span class="verse">9:11</span> But when the crowds found out, they followed him. He welcomed them, spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and cured those who needed healing. <span class="verse">9:12</span> Now the day began to draw to a close, so the twelve came and said to Jesus, “Send the crowd away, so they can go into the surrounding villages and countryside and find lodging and food, because we are in an isolated place.” <span class="verse">9:13</span> But he said to them, “You give them something to eat.” They replied, “We have no more than five loaves and two fish—unless we go and buy food for all these people.” <span class="verse">9:14</span> (Now about 5,000 men were there.) Then he said to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.” <span class="verse">9:15</span> So they did as Jesus directed, and the people all sat down. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:16</span> Then he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven he gave thanks and broke them. He gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd. <span class="verse">9:17</span> They all ate and were satisfied, and what was left over was picked up—twelve baskets of broken pieces. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter’s Confession </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:18</span> Once when Jesus was praying by himself, and his disciples were nearby, he asked them, “Who do the crowds say that I am?” <span class="verse">9:19</span> They answered, “John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others that one of the prophets of long ago has risen.” <span class="verse">9:20</span> Then he said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered, “The Christ of God.” <span class="verse">9:21</span> But he forcefully commanded them not to tell this to anyone, <span class="verse">9:22</span> saying, “The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and experts in the law, and be killed, and on the third day be raised.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Call to Discipleship </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:23</span> Then he said to them all, “If anyone wants to become my follower, he must deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow me. <span class="verse">9:24</span> For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life because of me will save it. <span class="verse">9:25</span> For what does it benefit a person if he gains the whole world but loses or forfeits himself? <span class="verse">9:26</span> For whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of that person when he comes in his glory and in the glory of the Father and of the holy angels. <span class="verse">9:27</span> But I tell you most certainly, there are some standing here who will not experience death before they see the kingdom of God.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Transfiguration </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:28</span> Now about eight days after these sayings, Jesus took with him Peter, John, and James, and went up the mountain to pray. <span class="verse">9:29</span> As he was praying, the appearance of his face was transformed, and his clothes became very bright, a brilliant white. <span class="verse">9:30</span> Then two men, Moses and Elijah, began talking with him. <span class="verse">9:31</span> They appeared in glorious splendor and spoke about his departure that he was about to carry out at Jerusalem. <span class="verse">9:32</span> Now Peter and those with him were quite sleepy, but as they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him. <span class="verse">9:33</span> Then as the men were starting to leave, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three shelters, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah”—not knowing what he was saying. <span class="verse">9:34</span> As he was saying this, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud. <span class="verse">9:35</span> Then a voice came from the cloud, saying, “This is my Son, my Chosen One. Listen to him!” <span class="verse">9:36</span> After the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone. So they kept silent and told no one at that time anything of what they had seen. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing a Boy with an Unclean Spirit</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:37</span> Now on the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a large crowd met him. <span class="verse">9:38</span> Then a man from the crowd cried out, “Teacher, I beg you to look at my son—he is my only child! <span class="verse">9:39</span> A spirit seizes him, and he suddenly screams; it throws him into convulsions and causes him to foam at the mouth. It hardly ever leaves him alone, torturing him severely. <span class="verse">9:40</span> I begged your disciples to cast it out, but they could not do so.” <span class="verse">9:41</span> Jesus answered, “You unbelieving and perverse generation! How much longer must I be with you and endure you? Bring your son here.” <span class="verse">9:42</span> As the boy was approaching, the demon threw him to the ground and shook him with convulsions. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and gave him back to his father. <span class="verse">9:43</span> Then they were all astonished at the mighty power of God.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Another Prediction of Jesus’ Suffering </p><p class="bodytext">But while the entire crowd was amazed at everything Jesus was doing, he said to his disciples, <span class="verse">9:44</span> “Take these words to heart, for the Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men.” <span class="verse">9:45</span> But they did not understand this statement; its meaning had been concealed from them, so that they could not grasp it. Yet they were afraid to ask him about this statement. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concerning the Greatest</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:46</span> Now an argument started among the disciples as to which of them might be the greatest. <span class="verse">9:47</span> But when Jesus discerned their innermost thoughts, he took a child, had him stand by his side, <span class="verse">9:48</span> and said to them, “Whoever welcomes this child in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me, for the one who is least among you all is the one who is great.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">On the Right Side </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:49</span> John answered, “Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we tried to stop him because he is not a disciple along with us.” <span class="verse">9:50</span> But Jesus said to him, “Do not stop him, for whoever is not against you is for you.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rejection in Samaria</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:51</span> Now when the days drew near for him to be taken up, Jesus set out resolutely to go to Jerusalem. <span class="verse">9:52</span> He sent messengers on ahead of him. As they went along, they entered a Samaritan village to make things ready in advance for him, <span class="verse">9:53</span> but the villagers refused to welcome him, because he was determined to go to Jerusalem. <span class="verse">9:54</span> Now when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, “Lord, do you want us <i>to call fire to come down from heaven and consume</i> <i>them</i>?” <span class="verse">9:55</span> But Jesus turned and rebuked them, <span class="verse">9:56</span> and they went on to another village. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Challenging Professed Followers </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:57</span> As they were walking along the road, someone said to him, “I will follow you wherever you go.” <span class="verse">9:58</span> Jesus said to him, “Foxes have dens and the birds in the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.” <span class="verse">9:59</span> Jesus said to another, “Follow me.” But he replied, “Lord, first let me go and bury my father.” <span class="verse">9:60</span> But Jesus said to him, “Let the dead bury their own dead, but as for you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God.” <span class="verse">9:61</span> Yet another said, “I will follow you, Lord, but first let me say goodbye to my family.” <span class="verse">9:62</span> Jesus said to him, “No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.” </p>

</body>
</html>