<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Table of Nations</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> This is the account of Noah’s sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Sons were born to them after the flood. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:2</span> The sons of Japheth were Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras. <span class="verse">10:3</span> The sons of Gomer were Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah. <span class="verse">10:4</span> The sons of Javan were Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittim, and the Dodanim. <span class="verse">10:5</span> From these the coastlands of the nations were separated into their lands, every one according to its language, according to their families, by their nations. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:6</span> The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. <span class="verse">10:7</span> The sons of Cush were Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah were Sheba and Dedan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:8</span> Cush was the father of Nimrod; he began to be a valiant warrior on the earth. <span class="verse">10:9</span> He was a mighty hunter before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. (That is why it is said, “Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”) <span class="verse">10:10</span> The primary regions of his kingdom were Babel, Erech, Akkad, and Calneh in the land of Shinar. <span class="verse">10:11</span> From that land he went to Assyria, where he built Nineveh, Rehoboth Ir, Calah, <span class="verse">10:12</span> and Resen, which is between Nineveh and the great city Calah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:13</span> Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites, <span class="verse">10:14</span> Pathrusites, Casluhites (from whom the Philistines came), and Caphtorites. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:15</span> Canaan was the father of Sidon his firstborn, Heth, <span class="verse">10:16</span> the Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites, <span class="verse">10:17</span> Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, <span class="verse">10:18</span> Arvadites, Zemarites, and Hamathites. Eventually the families of the Canaanites were scattered <span class="verse">10:19</span> and the borders of Canaan extended from Sidon all the way to Gerar as far as Gaza, and all the way to Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboyim, as far as Lasha. <span class="verse">10:20</span> These are the sons of Ham, according to their families, according to their languages, by their lands, and by their nations. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:21</span> And sons were also born to Shem (the older brother of Japheth), the father of all the sons of Eber. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:22</span> The sons of Shem were Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram. <span class="verse">10:23</span> The sons of Aram were Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash. <span class="verse">10:24</span> Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah was the father of Eber. <span class="verse">10:25</span> Two sons were born to Eber: One was named Peleg because in his days the earth was divided, and his brother’s name was Joktan. <span class="verse">10:26</span> Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, <span class="verse">10:27</span> Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, <span class="verse">10:28</span> Obal, Abimael, Sheba, <span class="verse">10:29</span> Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were sons of Joktan. <span class="verse">10:30</span> Their dwelling place was from Mesha all the way to Sephar in the eastern hills. <span class="verse">10:31</span> These are the sons of Shem according to their families, according to their languages, by their lands, and according to their nations. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:32</span> These are the families of the sons of Noah, according to their genealogies, by their nations, and from these the nations spread over the earth after the flood. </p>

</body>
</html>