<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Micah 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Micah<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:1</span> (4:14) But now slash yourself, daughter surrounded by soldiers! </p>
<p class="poetry">We are besieged!</p>
<p class="poetry">With a scepter they strike Israel’s ruler </p>
<p class="poetry">on the side of his face. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A King Will Come and a Remnant Will Prosper</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> (5:1) As for you, Bethlehem Ephrathah, </p>
<p class="poetry">seemingly insignificant among the clans of Judah—</p>
<p class="poetry">from you a king will emerge who will rule over Israel on my behalf, </p>
<p class="poetry">one whose origins are in the distant past. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will hand the people of Israel over to their enemies </p>
<p class="poetry">until the time when the woman in labor gives birth. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then the rest of the king’s countrymen will return</p>
<p class="poetry">to be reunited with the people of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> He will assume his post and shepherd the people by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s strength,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the sovereign authority of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will live securely, for at that time he will be honored </p>
<p class="poetry">even in the distant regions of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> He will give us peace. </p>
<p class="poetry">Should the Assyrians try to invade our land</p>
<p class="poetry">and attempt to set foot in our fortresses, </p>
<p class="poetry">we will send against them seven shepherd-rulers, </p>
<p class="poetry">make that eight commanders. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> They will rule the land of Assyria with the sword,</p>
<p class="poetry">the land of Nimrod with a drawn sword. </p>
<p class="poetry">Our king will rescue us from the Assyrians</p>
<p class="poetry">should they attempt to invade our land</p>
<p class="poetry">and try to set foot in our territory. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> Those survivors from Jacob will live </p>
<p class="poetry">in the midst of many nations. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will be like the dew the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> sends,</p>
<p class="poetry">like the rain on the grass,</p>
<p class="poetry">that does not hope for men to come</p>
<p class="poetry">or wait around for humans to arrive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> Those survivors from Jacob will live among the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the midst of many peoples.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will be like a lion among the animals of the forest,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a young lion among the flocks of sheep,</p>
<p class="poetry">which attacks when it passes through.</p>
<p class="poetry">It rips its prey and there is no one to stop it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> Lift your hand triumphantly against your adversaries; </p>
<p class="poetry">may all your enemies be destroyed! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Purify His People</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> “In that day,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will destroy your horses from your midst</p>
<p class="poetry">and smash your chariots. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> I will destroy the cities of your land</p>
<p class="poetry">and tear down all your fortresses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> I will remove the sorcery that you practice, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will no longer have omen readers living among you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> I will remove your idols and sacred pillars from your midst;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will no longer worship what your own hands made. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:14</span> I will uproot your images of Asherah from your midst</p>
<p class="poetry">and destroy your idols. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> With furious anger I will carry out vengeance</p>
<p class="poetry">on the nations that do not obey me.”</p>

</body>
</html>