<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Life is Brief and Death is Certain</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:1</span> A good reputation is better than precious perfume; </p>
<p class="poetry">likewise, the day of one’s death is better than the day of one’s birth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:2</span> It is better to go to a funeral </p>
<p class="poetry">than a feast. </p>
<p class="poetry">For death is the destiny of every person, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the living should take this to heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:3</span> Sorrow is better than laughter,</p>
<p class="poetry">because sober reflection is good for the heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:4</span> The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the heart of fools is in the house of merrymaking. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Frivolous Living Versus Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:5</span> It is better for a person to receive a rebuke from those who are wise </p>
<p class="poetry">than to listen to the song of fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:6</span> For like the crackling of quick-burning thorns under a cooking pot,</p>
<p class="poetry">so is the laughter of the fool.</p>
<p class="poetry">This kind of folly also is useless. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Human Wisdom Overturned by Adversity</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> Surely oppression can turn a wise person into a fool; </p>
<p class="poetry">likewise, a bribe corrupts the heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:8</span> The end of a matter is better than its beginning;</p>
<p class="poetry">likewise, patience is better than pride. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:9</span> Do not let yourself be quickly provoked, </p>
<p class="poetry">for anger resides in the lap of fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:10</span> Do not say, “Why were the old days better than these days?” </p>
<p class="poetry">for it is not wise to ask that. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom Can Lengthen One’s Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:11</span> Wisdom, like an inheritance, is a good thing;</p>
<p class="poetry">it benefits those who see the light of day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:12</span> For wisdom provides protection, </p>
<p class="poetry">just as money provides protection. </p>
<p class="poetry">But the advantage of knowledge is this:</p>
<p class="poetry">Wisdom preserves the life of its owner. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom Acknowledges God’s Orchestration of Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:13</span> Consider the work of God:</p>
<p class="poetry">For who can make straight what he has bent? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:14</span> In times of prosperity be joyful,</p>
<p class="poetry">but in times of adversity consider this:</p>
<p class="poetry">God has made one as well as the other, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that no one can discover what the future holds. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exceptions to the Law of Retribution</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:15</span> During the days of my fleeting life I have seen both of these things:</p>
<p class="poetry">Sometimes a righteous person dies prematurely in spite of his righteousness,</p>
<p class="poetry">and sometimes a wicked person lives long in spite of his evil deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:16</span> So do not be excessively righteous or excessively wise; </p>
<p class="poetry">otherwise you might be disappointed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:17</span> Do not be excessively wicked and do not be a fool;</p>
<p class="poetry">otherwise you might die before your time. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:18</span> It is best to take hold of one warning without letting go of the other warning; </p>
<p class="poetry">for the one who fears God will follow both warnings. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom Needed Because No One is Truly Righteous</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:19</span> Wisdom gives a wise person more protection </p>
<p class="poetry">than ten rulers in a city. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:20</span> For there is not one truly righteous person on the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">who continually does good and never sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:21</span> Also, do not pay attention to everything that people say;</p>
<p class="poetry">otherwise, you might even hear your servant cursing you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:22</span> For you know in your own heart </p>
<p class="poetry">that you also have cursed others many times. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Human Wisdom is Limited</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:23</span> I have examined all this by wisdom;</p>
<p class="poetry">I said, “I am determined to comprehend this” —but it was beyond my grasp. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:24</span> Whatever has happened is beyond human understanding; </p>
<p class="poetry">it is far deeper than anyone can fathom. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">True Righteousness and Wisdom Are Virtually Nonexistent</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:25</span> I tried to understand, examine, and comprehend </p>
<p class="poetry">the role of wisdom in the scheme of things, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to understand the stupidity of wickedness and the insanity of folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:26</span> I discovered this: </p>
<p class="poetry">More bitter than death is the kind of woman who is like a hunter’s snare; </p>
<p class="poetry">her heart is like a hunter’s net and her hands are like prison chains.</p>
<p class="poetry">The man who pleases God escapes her,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the sinner is captured by her.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:27</span> The Teacher says:</p>
<p class="poetry">I discovered this while trying to discover the scheme of things, item by item. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:28</span> What I have continually sought, I have not found;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have found only one upright man among a thousand,</p>
<p class="poetry">but I have not found one upright woman among all of them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">7:29</span> This alone have I discovered: God made humankind upright,</p>
<p class="poetry">but they have sought many evil schemes. </p>

</body>
</html>