<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 65</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 65</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Distinguish Between Sinners and the Godly</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:1</span> “I made myself available to those who did not ask for me; </p>
<p class="poetry">I appeared to those who did not look for me. </p>
<p class="poetry">I said, ‘Here I am! Here I am!’</p>
<p class="poetry">to a nation that did not invoke my name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:2</span> I spread out my hands all day long</p>
<p class="poetry">to my rebellious people,</p>
<p class="poetry">who lived in a way that is morally unacceptable,</p>
<p class="poetry">and who did what they desired. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:3</span> These people continually and blatantly offend me </p>
<p class="poetry">as they sacrifice in their sacred orchards </p>
<p class="poetry">and burn incense on brick altars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:4</span> They sit among the tombs </p>
<p class="poetry">and keep watch all night long. </p>
<p class="poetry">They eat pork, </p>
<p class="poetry">and broth from unclean sacrificial meat is in their pans. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:5</span> They say, ‘Keep to yourself!</p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t get near me, for I am holier than you!’</p>
<p class="poetry">These people are like smoke in my nostrils,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a fire that keeps burning all day long.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:6</span> Look, I have decreed: </p>
<p class="poetry">I will not keep silent, but will pay them back;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will pay them back exactly what they deserve, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:7</span> for your sins and your ancestors’ sins,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because they burned incense on the mountains</p>
<p class="poetry">and offended me on the hills,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will punish them in full measure.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">65:8</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“When juice is discovered in a cluster of grapes,</p>
<p class="poetry">someone says, ‘Don’t destroy it, for it contains juice.’ </p>
<p class="poetry">So I will do for the sake of my servants—</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not destroy everyone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:9</span> I will bring forth descendants from Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from Judah people to take possession of my mountains.</p>
<p class="poetry">My chosen ones will take possession of the land; </p>
<p class="poetry">my servants will live there. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:10</span> Sharon will become a pasture for sheep,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the Valley of Achor a place where cattle graze; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will belong to my people, who seek me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:11</span> But as for you who abandon the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">and forget about worshiping at my holy mountain,</p>
<p class="poetry">who prepare a feast for the god called ‘Fortune,’ </p>
<p class="poetry">and fill up wine jugs for the god called ‘Destiny’ —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:12</span> I predestine you to die by the sword, </p>
<p class="poetry">all of you will kneel down at the slaughtering block, </p>
<p class="poetry">because I called to you, and you did not respond;</p>
<p class="poetry">I spoke and you did not listen.</p>
<p class="poetry">You did evil before me; </p>
<p class="poetry">you chose to do what displeases me.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">65:13</span> So this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Look, my servants will eat, but you will be hungry.</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, my servants will drink, but you will be thirsty.</p>
<p class="poetry">Look, my servants will rejoice, but you will be humiliated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:14</span> Look, my servants will shout for joy as happiness fills their hearts. </p>
<p class="poetry">But you will cry out as sorrow fills your hearts; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will wail because your spirits will be crushed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:15</span> Your names will live on in the curse formulas of my chosen ones. </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will kill you,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he will give his servants another name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:16</span> Whoever pronounces a blessing in the earth </p>
<p class="poetry">will do so in the name of the faithful God; </p>
<p class="poetry">whoever makes an oath in the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">will do so in the name of the faithful God. </p>
<p class="poetry">For past problems will be forgotten;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will no longer think about them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:17</span> For look, I am ready to create </p>
<p class="poetry">new heavens and a new earth! </p>
<p class="poetry">The former ones will not be remembered;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one will think about them anymore. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:18</span> But be happy and rejoice forevermore</p>
<p class="poetry">over what I am about to create!</p>
<p class="poetry">For look, I am ready to create Jerusalem to be a source of joy, </p>
<p class="poetry">and her people to be a source of happiness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:19</span> Jerusalem will bring me joy,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my people will bring me happiness. </p>
<p class="poetry">The sound of weeping or cries of sorrow</p>
<p class="poetry">will never be heard in her again. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:20</span> Never again will one of her infants live just a few days </p>
<p class="poetry">or an old man die before his time. </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, no one will die before the age of one hundred; </p>
<p class="poetry">anyone who fails to reach the age of one hundred will be considered cursed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:21</span> They will build houses and live in them;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will plant vineyards and eat their fruit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:22</span> No longer will they build a house only to have another live in it, </p>
<p class="poetry">or plant a vineyard only to have another eat its fruit, </p>
<p class="poetry">for my people will live as long as trees, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my chosen ones will enjoy to the fullest what they have produced. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:23</span> They will not work in vain,</p>
<p class="poetry">or give birth to children that will experience disaster. </p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will bless their children</p>
<p class="poetry">and their descendants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:24</span> Before they even call out, I will respond;</p>
<p class="poetry">while they are still speaking, I will hear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">65:25</span> A wolf and a lamb will graze together; </p>
<p class="poetry">a lion, like an ox, will eat straw, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a snake’s food will be dirt. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will no longer injure or destroy</p>
<p class="poetry">on my entire royal mountain,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>