<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 29</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 29</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:1</span> The one who stiffens his neck after numerous rebukes </p>
<p class="poetry">will suddenly be destroyed without remedy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:2</span> When the righteous become numerous, the people rejoice;</p>
<p class="poetry">when the wicked rule, the people groan. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:3</span> The man who loves wisdom brings joy to his father, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever associates with prostitutes wastes his wealth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:4</span> A king brings stability to a land by justice,</p>
<p class="poetry">but one who exacts tribute tears it down.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:5</span> The one who flatters his neighbor</p>
<p class="poetry">spreads a net for his steps. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:6</span> In the transgression of an evil person there is a snare, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a righteous person can sing and rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:7</span> The righteous person cares for the legal rights of the poor;</p>
<p class="poetry">the wicked person does not understand such knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:8</span> Scornful people inflame a city, </p>
<p class="poetry">but those who are wise turn away wrath. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:9</span> When a wise person goes to court with a foolish person,</p>
<p class="poetry">there is no peace whether he is angry or laughs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:10</span> Bloodthirsty people hate someone with integrity; </p>
<p class="poetry">as for the upright, they seek his life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:11</span> A fool lets fly with all his temper, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a wise person keeps it back. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:12</span> If a ruler listens to lies, </p>
<p class="poetry">all his ministers will be wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:13</span> The poor person and the oppressor have this in common: </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> gives light to the eyes of them both. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:14</span> If a king judges the poor in truth, </p>
<p class="poetry">his throne will be established forever. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:15</span> A rod and reproof impart wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a child who is unrestrained brings shame to his mother. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:16</span> When the wicked increase, transgression increases,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the righteous will see their downfall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:17</span> Discipline your child, and he will give you rest; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will bring you happiness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:18</span> When there is no prophetic vision the people cast off restraint, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who keeps the law, blessed is he! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:19</span> A servant cannot be corrected by words,</p>
<p class="poetry">for although he understands, there is no answer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:20</span> You have seen someone who is hasty in his words — </p>
<p class="poetry">there is more hope for a fool than for him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:21</span> If someone pampers his servant from youth,</p>
<p class="poetry">he will be a weakling in the end. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:22</span> An angry person stirs up dissension,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a wrathful person is abounding in transgression. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:23</span> A person’s pride will bring him low, </p>
<p class="poetry">but one who has a lowly spirit will gain honor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:24</span> Whoever shares with a thief is his own enemy; </p>
<p class="poetry">he hears the oath to testify, but does not talk. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:25</span> The fear of people becomes a snare, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever trusts in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be set on high. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:26</span> Many people seek the face of a ruler,</p>
<p class="poetry">but it is from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> that one receives justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:27</span> An unjust person is an abomination to the righteous,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who lives an upright life is an abomination to the wicked. </p>

</body>
</html>