<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 60</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 60</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Zion’s Future Splendor</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:1</span> “Arise! Shine! For your light arrives!</p>
<p class="poetry">The splendor of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> shines on you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:2</span> For, look, darkness covers the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">and deep darkness covers the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> shines on you;</p>
<p class="poetry">his splendor appears over you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:3</span> Nations come to your light,</p>
<p class="poetry">kings to your bright light. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:4</span> Look all around you! </p>
<p class="poetry">They all gather and come to you—</p>
<p class="poetry">your sons come from far away,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your daughters are escorted by guardians. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:5</span> Then you will look and smile, </p>
<p class="poetry">you will be excited and your heart will swell with pride. </p>
<p class="poetry">For the riches of distant lands will belong to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the wealth of nations will come to you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:6</span> Camel caravans will cover your roads, </p>
<p class="poetry">young camels from Midian and Ephah.</p>
<p class="poetry">All the merchants of Sheba will come,</p>
<p class="poetry">bringing gold and incense</p>
<p class="poetry">and singing praises to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:7</span> All the sheep of Kedar will be gathered to you;</p>
<p class="poetry">the rams of Nebaioth will be available to you as sacrifices. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will go up on my altar acceptably, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will bestow honor on my majestic temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:8</span> Who are these who float along like a cloud,</p>
<p class="poetry">who fly like doves to their shelters? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:9</span> Indeed, the coastlands look eagerly for me;</p>
<p class="poetry">the large ships are in the lead,</p>
<p class="poetry">bringing your sons from far away,</p>
<p class="poetry">along with their silver and gold,</p>
<p class="poetry">to honor the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, </p>
<p class="poetry">the Holy One of Israel, for he has bestowed honor on you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:10</span> Foreigners will rebuild your walls;</p>
<p class="poetry">their kings will serve you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even though I struck you down in my anger,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will restore my favor and have compassion on you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:11</span> Your gates will remain open at all times;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will not be shut during the day or at night,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that the wealth of nations may be delivered,</p>
<p class="poetry">with their kings leading the way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:12</span> Indeed, nations or kingdoms that do not serve you will perish;</p>
<p class="poetry">such nations will definitely be destroyed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:13</span> The splendor of Lebanon will come to you, </p>
<p class="poetry">its evergreens, firs, and cypresses together,</p>
<p class="poetry">to beautify my palace; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will bestow honor on my throne room. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:14</span> The children of your oppressors will come bowing to you;</p>
<p class="poetry">all who treated you with disrespect will bow down at your feet.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will call you, ‘The City of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">Zion of the Holy One of Israel.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:15</span> You were once abandoned </p>
<p class="poetry">and despised, with no one passing through,</p>
<p class="poetry">but I will make you a permanent source of pride</p>
<p class="poetry">and joy to coming generations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:16</span> You will drink the milk of nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will nurse at the breasts of kings. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then you will recognize that I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, am your Deliverer,</p>
<p class="poetry">your Protector, the Powerful One of Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:17</span> Instead of bronze, I will bring you gold;</p>
<p class="poetry">instead of iron, I will bring you silver;</p>
<p class="poetry">instead of wood, I will bring you bronze;</p>
<p class="poetry">instead of stones, I will bring you iron.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will make prosperity your overseer,</p>
<p class="poetry">and vindication your sovereign ruler. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:18</span> Sounds of violence will no longer be heard in your land,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the sounds of destruction and devastation within your borders.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will name your walls, ‘Deliverance,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and your gates, ‘Praise.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:19</span> The sun will no longer supply light for you by day,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor will the moon’s brightness shine on you;</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be your permanent source of light—</p>
<p class="poetry">the splendor of your God will shine upon you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:20</span> Your sun will no longer set;</p>
<p class="poetry">your moon will not disappear; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be your permanent source of light;</p>
<p class="poetry">your time of sorrow will be over.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:21</span> All your people will be godly; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will possess the land permanently.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will plant them like a shoot;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will be the product of my labor,</p>
<p class="poetry">through whom I reveal my splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">60:22</span> The least of you will multiply into a thousand;</p>
<p class="poetry">the smallest of you will become a large nation.</p>
<p class="poetry">When the right time comes, I the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will quickly do this!” </p>

</body>
</html>