<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:1</span> My spirit is broken, </p>
<p class="poetry">my days have faded out, </p>
<p class="poetry">the grave awaits me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:2</span> Surely mockery is with me; </p>
<p class="poetry">my eyes must dwell on their hostility. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:3</span> Set my pledge beside you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Who else will put up security for me? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:4</span> Because you have closed their minds to understanding,</p>
<p class="poetry">therefore you will not exalt them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:5</span> If a man denounces his friends for personal gain, </p>
<p class="poetry">the eyes of his children will fail. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:6</span> He has made me a byword to people,</p>
<p class="poetry">I am the one in whose face they spit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:7</span> My eyes have grown dim with grief;</p>
<p class="poetry">my whole frame is but a shadow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:8</span> Upright men are appalled at this;</p>
<p class="poetry">the innocent man is troubled with the godless. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:9</span> But the righteous man holds to his way,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the one with clean hands grows stronger. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Anticipation of Death</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:10</span> “But turn, all of you, and come now! </p>
<p class="poetry">I will not find a wise man among you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:11</span> My days have passed, my plans are shattered,</p>
<p class="poetry">even the desires of my heart. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:12</span> These men change night into day;</p>
<p class="poetry">they say, ‘The light is near </p>
<p class="poetry">in the face of darkness.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:13</span> If I hope for the grave to be my home,</p>
<p class="poetry">if I spread out my bed in darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:14</span> if I cry out to corruption, ‘You are my father,’</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the worm, ‘My mother,’ or ‘My sister,’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:15</span> where then is my hope?</p>
<p class="poetry">And my hope, who sees it?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">17:16</span> Will it go down to the barred gates of death?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will we descend together into the dust?” </p>

</body>
</html>