<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:1</span> Every wise woman has built her household, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a foolish woman tears it down with her own hands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:2</span> The one who walks in his uprightness fears the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who is perverted in his ways despises him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:3</span> In the speech of a fool is a rod for his back, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the words of the wise protect them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:4</span> Where there are no oxen, the feeding trough is clean,</p>
<p class="poetry">but an abundant harvest is produced by strong oxen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:5</span> A truthful witness does not lie,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a false witness breathes out lies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:6</span> The scorner sought wisdom—there was none, </p>
<p class="poetry">but understanding was easy for a discerning person.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:7</span> Walk abreast with a foolish person, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you do not understand wise counsel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:8</span> The wisdom of the shrewd person is to discern his way,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the folly of fools is deception. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:9</span> Fools mock at reparation, </p>
<p class="poetry">but among the upright there is favor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:10</span> The heart knows its own bitterness, </p>
<p class="poetry">and with its joy no one else can share. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:11</span> The household of the wicked will be destroyed,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the tent of the upright will flourish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:12</span> There is a way that seems right to a person, </p>
<p class="poetry">but its end is the way that leads to death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:13</span> Even in laughter the heart may ache, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the end of joy may be grief. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:14</span> The backslider will be paid back from his own ways,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a good person will be rewarded for his.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:15</span> A naive person will believe anything,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the shrewd person discerns his steps. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:16</span> A wise person is cautious and turns from evil,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a fool throws off restraint and is overconfident. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:17</span> A person who has a quick temper will do foolish things,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a person with crafty schemes will be hated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:18</span> The naive have inherited folly,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the shrewd will be crowned with knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:19</span> Bad people have bowed before good people,</p>
<p class="poetry">and wicked people have bowed at the gates of someone righteous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:20</span> A poor person will be disliked even by his neighbors,</p>
<p class="poetry">but those who love the rich are many. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:21</span> The one who despises his neighbor sins,</p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever is kind to the needy is blessed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:22</span> Do not those who devise evil go astray?</p>
<p class="poetry">But those who plan good exhibit faithful covenant love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:23</span> In all hard work there is profit,</p>
<p class="poetry">but merely talking about it only brings poverty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:24</span> The crown of the wise is their riches, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the folly of fools is folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:25</span> A truthful witness rescues lives, </p>
<p class="poetry">but one who testifies falsely betrays them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:26</span> In the fear of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> one has strong confidence, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it will be a refuge for his children. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:27</span> The fear of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is like a life-giving fountain, </p>
<p class="poetry">to turn people from deadly snares. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:28</span> A king’s glory is the abundance of people,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the lack of subjects is the ruin of a ruler. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:29</span> Someone with great understanding is slow to anger, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who has a quick temper exalts folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:30</span> A tranquil spirit revives the body, </p>
<p class="poetry">but envy is rottenness to the bones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:31</span> The one who oppresses the poor has insulted his Creator,</p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever honors him shows favor to the needy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:32</span> An evil person will be thrown down through his wickedness, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a righteous person takes refuge in his integrity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:33</span> Wisdom rests in the heart of the discerning;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is not known in the inner parts of fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:34</span> Righteousness exalts a nation,</p>
<p class="poetry">but sin is a disgrace to any people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:35</span> The king shows favor to a wise servant,</p>
<p class="poetry">but his wrath falls on one who acts shamefully. </p>

</body>
</html>