<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Future Glory of Jerusalem</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Here is the message about Judah and Jerusalem that was revealed to Isaiah son of Amoz. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> In future days </p>
<p class="poetry">the mountain of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple will endure </p>
<p class="poetry">as the most important of mountains,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will be the most prominent of hills. </p>
<p class="poetry">All the nations will stream to it;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> many peoples will come and say,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Come, let us go up to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s mountain,</p>
<p class="poetry">to the temple of the God of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">so he can teach us his requirements, </p>
<p class="poetry">and we can follow his standards.” </p>
<p class="poetry">For Zion will be the center for moral instruction; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message will issue from Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> He will judge disputes between nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will settle cases for many peoples.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will beat their swords into plowshares, </p>
<p class="poetry">and their spears into pruning hooks. </p>
<p class="poetry">Nations will not take up the sword against other nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they will no longer train for war. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> O descendants of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">come, let us walk in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s guiding light. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Day of Judgment</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> Indeed, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you have abandoned your people,</p>
<p class="poetry">the descendants of Jacob.</p>
<p class="poetry">For diviners from the east are everywhere; </p>
<p class="poetry">they consult omen readers like the Philistines do. </p>
<p class="poetry">Plenty of foreigners are around. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> Their land is full of gold and silver;</p>
<p class="poetry">there is no end to their wealth. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their land is full of horses;</p>
<p class="poetry">there is no end to their chariots. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Their land is full of worthless idols;</p>
<p class="poetry">they worship the product of their own hands,</p>
<p class="poetry">what their own fingers have fashioned. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Men bow down to them in homage,</p>
<p class="poetry">they lie flat on the ground in worship. </p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t spare them! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> Go up into the rocky cliffs,</p>
<p class="poetry">hide in the ground.</p>
<p class="poetry">Get away from the dreadful judgment of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">from his royal splendor! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Proud men will be brought low,</p>
<p class="poetry">arrogant men will be humiliated; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> alone will be exalted </p>
<p class="poetry">in that day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has planned a day of judgment, </p>
<p class="poetry">for all the high and mighty,</p>
<p class="poetry">for all who are proud—they will be humiliated; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> for all the cedars of Lebanon,</p>
<p class="poetry">that are so high and mighty,</p>
<p class="poetry">for all the oaks of Bashan; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> for all the tall mountains,</p>
<p class="poetry">for all the high hills, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> for every high tower,</p>
<p class="poetry">for every fortified wall, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> for all the large ships, </p>
<p class="poetry">for all the impressive ships. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:17</span> Proud men will be humiliated,</p>
<p class="poetry">arrogant men will be brought low; </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> alone will be exalted </p>
<p class="poetry">in that day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:18</span> The worthless idols will be completely eliminated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:19</span> They will go into caves in the rocky cliffs</p>
<p class="poetry">and into holes in the ground, </p>
<p class="poetry">trying to escape the dreadful judgment of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> </p>
<p class="poetry">and his royal splendor,</p>
<p class="poetry">when he rises up to terrify the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:20</span> At that time men will throw </p>
<p class="poetry">their silver and gold idols,</p>
<p class="poetry">which they made for themselves to worship, </p>
<p class="poetry">into the caves where rodents and bats live, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:21</span> so they themselves can go into the crevices of the rocky cliffs</p>
<p class="poetry">and the openings under the rocky overhangs, </p>
<p class="poetry">trying to escape the dreadful judgment of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> </p>
<p class="poetry">and his royal splendor,</p>
<p class="poetry">when he rises up to terrify the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:22</span> Stop trusting in human beings,</p>
<p class="poetry">whose life’s breath is in their nostrils.</p>
<p class="poetry">For why should they be given special consideration? </p>

</body>
</html>