<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lily among the Thorns and the Apple Tree in the Forest</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:1</span> I am a meadow flower from Sharon, </p>
<p class="poetry">a lily from the valleys. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> Like a lily among the thorns, </p>
<p class="poetry">so is my darling among the maidens. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest,</p>
<p class="poetry">so is my beloved among the young men.</p>
<p class="poetry">I delight to sit in his shade, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his fruit is sweet to my taste. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Banquet Hall for the Lovesick</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> He brought me into the banquet hall, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he looked at me lovingly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> Sustain me with raisin cakes, </p>
<p class="poetry">refresh me with apples, </p>
<p class="poetry">for I am faint with love. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Double Refrain: Embracing and Adjuration</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> His left hand is under my head, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his right hand embraces me. </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to the Maidens:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> I admonish you, O maidens of Jerusalem,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the gazelles and by the young does of the open fields: </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not awaken or arouse love until it pleases! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Arrival of the Lover</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Listen! My lover is approaching! </p>
<p class="poetry">Look! Here he comes,</p>
<p class="poetry">leaping over the mountains,</p>
<p class="poetry">bounding over the hills! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> My lover is like a gazelle or a young stag. </p>
<p class="poetry">Look! There he stands behind our wall,</p>
<p class="poetry">gazing through the window,</p>
<p class="poetry">peering through the lattice. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Season of Love and the Song of the Turtledove</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> My lover spoke to me, saying:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Arise, my darling;</p>
<p class="poetry">My beautiful one, come away with me!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Look! The winter has passed,</p>
<p class="poetry">the winter rains are over and gone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> Blossoms have appeared in the land,</p>
<p class="poetry">the time for pruning and singing has come;</p>
<p class="poetry">the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> The fig tree has ripened its figs,</p>
<p class="poetry">the vines have blossomed and give off their fragrance.</p>
<p class="poetry">Arise, come away my darling;</p>
<p class="poetry">my beautiful one, come away with me!”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Dove in the Clefts of En Gedi</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> O my dove, in the clefts of the rock,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the hiding places of the mountain crags,</p>
<p class="poetry">let me see your face,</p>
<p class="poetry">let me hear your voice;</p>
<p class="poetry">for your voice is sweet,</p>
<p class="poetry">and your face is lovely. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Foxes in the Vineyard</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> Catch the foxes for us,</p>
<p class="poetry">the little foxes, </p>
<p class="poetry">that ruin the vineyards —</p>
<p class="poetry">for our vineyard is in bloom. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Poetic Refrain: Mutual Possession</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> My lover is mine and I am his;</p>
<p class="poetry">he grazes among the lilies. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Gazelle and the Rugged Mountains</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:17</span> Until the dawn arrives and the shadows flee,</p>
<p class="poetry">turn, my beloved—</p>
<p class="poetry">be like a gazelle or a young stag</p>
<p class="poetry">on the mountain gorges. </p>

</body>
</html>