<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 26</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 26</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Presentation of the Firstfruits</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:1</span> When you enter the land that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is giving you as an inheritance, and you occupy it and live in it, <span class="verse">26:2</span> you must take the first of all the ground’s produce you harvest from the land the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is giving you, place it in a basket, and go to the place where he chooses to locate his name. <span class="verse">26:3</span> You must go to the priest in office at that time and say to him, “I declare today to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God that I have come into the land that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> promised to our ancestors to give us.” <span class="verse">26:4</span> The priest will then take the basket from you and set it before the altar of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God. <span class="verse">26:5</span> Then you must affirm before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, “A wandering Aramean was my ancestor, and he went down to Egypt and lived there as a foreigner with a household few in number, but there he became a great, powerful, and numerous people. <span class="verse">26:6</span> But the Egyptians mistreated and oppressed us, forcing us to do burdensome labor. <span class="verse">26:7</span> So we cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of our ancestors, and he heard us and saw our humiliation, toil, and oppression. <span class="verse">26:8</span> Therefore the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> brought us out of Egypt with tremendous strength and power, as well as with great awe-inspiring signs and wonders. <span class="verse">26:9</span> Then he brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. <span class="verse">26:10</span> So now, look! I have brought the first of the ground’s produce that you, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have given me.” Then you must set it down before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God and worship before him. <span class="verse">26:11</span> You will celebrate all the good things that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God has given you and your family, along with the Levites and the resident foreigners among you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Presentation of the Third-year Tithe</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:12</span> When you finish tithing all your income in the third year (the year of tithing), you must give it to the Levites, the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows so that they may eat to their satisfaction in your villages. <span class="verse">26:13</span> Then you shall say before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, “I have removed the sacred offering from my house and given it to the Levites, the resident foreigners, the orphans, and the widows just as you have commanded me. I have not violated or forgotten your commandments. <span class="verse">26:14</span> I have not eaten anything when I was in mourning, or removed any of it while ceremonially unclean, or offered any of it to the dead; I have obeyed you and have done everything you have commanded me. <span class="verse">26:15</span> Look down from your holy dwelling place in heaven and bless your people Israel and the land you have given us, just as you promised our ancestors—a land flowing with milk and honey.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Narrative Interlude</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">26:16</span> Today the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is commanding you to keep these statutes and ordinances, something you must do with all your heart and soul. <span class="verse">26:17</span> Today you have declared the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> to be your God, and that you will walk in his ways, keep his statutes, commandments, and ordinances, and obey him. <span class="verse">26:18</span> And today the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has declared you to be his special people (as he already promised you) so you may keep all his commandments. <span class="verse">26:19</span> Then he will elevate you above all the nations he has made and you will receive praise, fame, and honor. You will be a people holy to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, as he has said. </p>

</body>
</html>