<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lost Lover is Found</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> All night long on my bed </p>
<p class="poetry">I longed for my lover. </p>
<p class="poetry">I longed for him but he never appeared. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> “I will arise and look all around throughout the town,</p>
<p class="poetry">and throughout the streets and squares;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will search for my beloved.”</p>
<p class="poetry">I searched for him but I did not find him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> The night watchmen found me—the ones who guard the city walls. </p>
<p class="poetry">“Have you seen my beloved?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> Scarcely had I passed them by</p>
<p class="poetry">when I found my beloved!</p>
<p class="poetry">I held onto him tightly and would not let him go </p>
<p class="poetry">until I brought him to my mother’s house, </p>
<p class="poetry">to the bedroom chamber of the one who conceived me.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Adjuration Refrain</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to the Maidens:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span>  I admonish you, O maidens of Jerusalem,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the gazelles and by the young does of the open fields:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Do not awaken or arouse love until it pleases!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Royal Wedding Procession</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Speaker: </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> Who is this coming up from the wilderness</p>
<p class="poetry">like a column of smoke,</p>
<p class="poetry">like a fragrant billow of myrrh and frankincense, </p>
<p class="poetry">every kind of fragrant powder of the traveling merchants? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Look! It is Solomon’s portable couch! </p>
<p class="poetry">It is surrounded by sixty warriors,</p>
<p class="poetry">some of Israel’s mightiest warriors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> All of them are skilled with a sword, </p>
<p class="poetry">well trained in the art of warfare. </p>
<p class="poetry">Each has his sword at his side,</p>
<p class="poetry">to guard against the terrors of the night. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> King Solomon made a sedan chair for himself</p>
<p class="poetry">of wood imported from Lebanon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> Its posts were made of silver; </p>
<p class="poetry">its back was made of gold.</p>
<p class="poetry">Its seat was upholstered with purple wool; </p>
<p class="poetry">its interior was inlaid with leather by the maidens of Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> Come out, O maidens of Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">and gaze upon King Solomon!</p>
<p class="poetry">He is wearing the crown with which his mother crowned him</p>
<p class="poetry">on his wedding day,</p>
<p class="poetry">on the most joyous day of his life! </p>

</body>
</html>