<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Adam’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> Adam, Seth, Enosh, <span class="verse">1:2</span> Kenan, Mahalalel, Jered, <span class="verse">1:3</span> Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, <span class="verse">1:4</span> Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Japheth’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:5</span> The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:6</span> The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:7</span> The sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittites, and the Rodanites. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ham’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:8</span> The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:9</span> The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raamah, and Sabteca.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:10</span> Cush was the father of Nimrod, who established himself as a mighty warrior on earth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:11</span> Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites, <span class="verse">1:12</span> Pathrusites, Casluhites (from whom the Philistines descended) , and the Caphtorites. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:13</span> Canaan was the father of Sidon—his firstborn—and Heth, <span class="verse">1:14</span> as well as the Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites, <span class="verse">1:15</span> Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, <span class="verse">1:16</span> Arvadites, Zemarites, and Hamathites. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Shem’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:17</span> The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Meshech. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:18</span> Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah was the father of Eber. <span class="verse">1:19</span> Two sons were born to Eber: the first was named Peleg, for during his lifetime the earth was divided; his brother’s name was Joktan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:20</span> Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, <span class="verse">1:21</span> Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, <span class="verse">1:22</span> Ebal, Abimael, Sheba, <span class="verse">1:23</span> Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:24</span> Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah, <span class="verse">1:25</span> Eber, Peleg, Reu, <span class="verse">1:26</span> Serug, Nahor, Terah, <span class="verse">1:27</span> Abram (that is, Abraham). </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:28</span> The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:29</span> These were their descendants:</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ishmael’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext">Ishmael’s firstborn son was Nebaioth; the others were Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, <span class="verse">1:30</span> Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema, <span class="verse">1:31</span> Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These were the sons of Ishmael.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Keturah’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:32</span> The sons to whom Keturah, Abraham’s concubine, gave birth: Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, Shuah.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:33</span> The sons of Midian: Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Isaac’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:34</span> Abraham was the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Esau’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:35</span> The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:36</span> The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, Omar, Zephi, Gatam, Kenaz, and (by Timna) Amalek. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:37</span> The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Descendants of Seir</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:38</span> The sons of Seir: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:39</span> The sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam. (Timna was Lotan’s sister.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:40</span> The sons of Shobal: Alyan, Manahath, Ebal, Shephi, and Onam.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:41</span> The son of Anah: Dishon.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Dishon: Hamran, Eshban, Ithran, and Keran. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:42</span> The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, Jaakan. </p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Kings of Edom</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:43</span> These were the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king ruled over the Israelites: Bela son of Beor; the name of his city was Dinhabah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:44</span> When Bela died, Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrah, succeeded him. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:45</span> When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites succeeded him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:46</span> When Husham died, Hadad son of Bedad succeeded him. He struck down the Midianites in the plains of Moab; the name of his city was Avith. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:47</span> When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah succeeded him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:48</span> When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth on the River succeeded him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:49</span> When Shaul died, Baal Hanan son of Achbor succeeded him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:50</span> When Baal Hanan died, Hadad succeeded him; the name of his city was Pai. His wife was Mehetabel, daughter of Matred, daughter of Me-Zahab. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:51</span> Hadad died.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Tribal Chiefs of Edom</p><p class="bodytext">The tribal chiefs of Edom were: Timna, Alvah, Jetheth, <span class="verse">1:52</span> Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon, <span class="verse">1:53</span> Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar, <span class="verse">1:54</span> Magdiel, and Iram. These were the tribal chiefs of Edom. </p>

</body>
</html>