<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zephaniah 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zephaniah<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Prophet Warns the People</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Bunch yourselves together like straw, you undesirable nation, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> before God’s decree becomes reality and the day of opportunity disappears like windblown chaff, </p>
<p class="poetry">before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s raging anger overtakes you—</p>
<p class="poetry">before the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s angry judgment overtakes you!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> Seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s favor, all you humble people of the land who have obeyed his commands! </p>
<p class="poetry">Strive to do what is right! Strive to be humble! </p>
<p class="poetry">Maybe you will be protected on the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s angry judgment.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judgment on Surrounding Nations</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> Indeed, Gaza will be deserted </p>
<p class="poetry">and Ashkelon will become a heap of ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry">Invaders will drive away the people of Ashdod by noon, </p>
<p class="poetry">and Ekron will be overthrown. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> Beware, you who live by the sea, the people who came from Crete. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message is against you, Canaan, land of the Philistines:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will destroy everyone who lives there!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> The seacoast will be used as pasture lands by the shepherds</p>
<p class="poetry">and as pens for their flocks. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> Those who are left from the kingdom of Judah will take possession of it. </p>
<p class="poetry">By the sea they will graze,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the houses of Ashkelon they will lie down in the evening,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God will intervene for them and restore their prosperity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> “I have heard Moab’s taunts</p>
<p class="poetry">and the Ammonites’ insults.</p>
<p class="poetry">They taunted my people</p>
<p class="poetry">and verbally harassed those living in Judah. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Therefore, as surely as I live,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">“be certain that Moab will become like Sodom</p>
<p class="poetry">and the Ammonites like Gomorrah.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will be overrun by weeds, </p>
<p class="poetry">filled with salt pits, </p>
<p class="poetry">and permanently desolate.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those of my people who are left will plunder their belongings; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who are left in Judah will take possession of their land.”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> This is how they will be repaid for their arrogance, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they taunted and verbally harassed the people of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will terrify them, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he will weaken all the gods of the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">All the distant nations will worship the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in their own lands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> “You Ethiopians will also die by my sword!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will attack the north </p>
<p class="poetry">and destroy Assyria.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will make Nineveh a heap of ruins;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will be as barren as the desert. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> Flocks and herds will lie down in the middle of it,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as every kind of wild animal. </p>
<p class="poetry">Owls will sleep in the tops of its support pillars;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will hoot through the windows. </p>
<p class="poetry">Rubble will cover the thresholds; </p>
<p class="poetry">even the cedar work will be exposed to the elements. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> This is how the once-proud city will end up—</p>
<p class="poetry">the city that was so secure. </p>
<p class="poetry">She thought to herself, “I am unique! No one can compare to me!” </p>
<p class="poetry">What a heap of ruins she has become, a place where wild animals live!</p>
<p class="poetry">Everyone who passes by her taunts her and shakes his fist. </p>

</body>
</html>