<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Kings 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Kings<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ahab Murders Naboth</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:1</span> After this the following episode took place. Naboth the Jezreelite owned a vineyard in Jezreel adjacent to the palace of King Ahab of Samaria. <span class="verse">21:2</span> Ahab said to Naboth, “Give me your vineyard so I can make a vegetable garden out of it, for it is adjacent to my palace. I will give you an even better vineyard in its place, or if you prefer, I will pay you silver for it.” <span class="verse">21:3</span> But Naboth replied to Ahab, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> forbid that I should sell you my ancestral inheritance.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:4</span> So Ahab went into his palace, bitter and angry that Naboth the Jezreelite had said, “I will not sell to you my ancestral inheritance.” He lay down on his bed, pouted, and would not eat. <span class="verse">21:5</span> Then his wife Jezebel came in and said to him, “Why do you have a bitter attitude and refuse to eat?” <span class="verse">21:6</span> He answered her, “While I was talking to Naboth the Jezreelite, I said to him, ‘Sell me your vineyard for silver, or if you prefer, I will give you another vineyard in its place.’ But he said, ‘I will not sell you my vineyard.’” <span class="verse">21:7</span> His wife Jezebel said to him, “You are the king of Israel! Get up, eat some food, and have a good time. I will get the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite for you.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:8</span> She wrote out orders, signed Ahab’s name to them, and sealed them with his seal. She then sent the orders to the leaders and to the nobles who lived in Naboth’s city. <span class="verse">21:9</span> This is what she wrote: “Observe a time of fasting and seat Naboth in front of the people. <span class="verse">21:10</span> Also seat two villains opposite him and have them testify, ‘You cursed God and the king.’ Then take him out and stone him to death.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:11</span> The men of the city, the leaders, and the nobles who lived there followed the written orders Jezebel had sent them. <span class="verse">21:12</span> They observed a time of fasting and put Naboth in front of the people. <span class="verse">21:13</span> The two villains arrived and sat opposite him. Then the villains testified against Naboth right before the people, saying, “Naboth cursed God and the king.” So they dragged him outside the city and stoned him to death. <span class="verse">21:14</span> Then they reported to Jezebel, “Naboth has been stoned to death.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:15</span> When Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned to death, she said to Ahab, “Get up, take possession of the vineyard Naboth the Jezreelite refused to sell you for silver, for Naboth is no longer alive; he’s dead.” <span class="verse">21:16</span> When Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, he got up and went down to take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:17</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’s</span> message came to Elijah the Tishbite: <span class="verse">21:18</span> “Get up, go down and meet King Ahab of Israel who lives in Samaria. He is at the vineyard of Naboth; he has gone down there to take possession of it. <span class="verse">21:19</span> Say to him, ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said: “Haven’t you committed murder and taken possession of the property of the deceased?”’ Then say to him, ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said: “In the spot where dogs licked up Naboth’s blood they will also lick up your blood—yes, yours!”’”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:20</span> When Elijah arrived, Ahab said to him, “So, you have found me, my enemy!” Elijah replied, “I have found you, because you are committed to doing evil in the sight of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">21:21</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, ‘Look, I am ready to bring disaster on you. I will destroy you and cut off every last male belonging to Ahab in Israel, including even the weak and incapacitated. <span class="verse">21:22</span> I will make your dynasty like those of Jeroboam son of Nebat and Baasha son of Ahijah because you angered me and made Israel sin.’ <span class="verse">21:23</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says this about Jezebel, ‘Dogs will devour Jezebel by the outer wall of Jezreel.’ <span class="verse">21:24</span> As for Ahab’s family, dogs will eat the ones who die in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat the ones who die in the country.” <span class="verse">21:25</span> (There had never been anyone like Ahab, who was firmly committed to doing evil in the sight of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, urged on by his wife Jezebel. <span class="verse">21:26</span> He was so wicked he worshiped the disgusting idols, just as the Amorites whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had driven out from before the Israelites.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:27</span> When Ahab heard these words, he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and fasted. He slept in sackcloth and walked around dejected. <span class="verse">21:28</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to Elijah the Tishbite, <span class="verse">21:29</span> “Have you noticed how Ahab shows remorse before me? Because he shows remorse before me, I will not bring disaster on his dynasty during his lifetime, but during the reign of his son.” </p>

</body>
</html>