<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Kings 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Kings<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elijah Visits a Widow in Sidonian Territory</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> Elijah the Tishbite, from Tishbe in Gilead, said to Ahab, “As certainly as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel lives (whom I serve), there will be no dew or rain in the years ahead unless I give the command.” <span class="verse">17:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to him: <span class="verse">17:3</span> “Leave here and travel eastward. Hide out in the Kerith Valley near the Jordan. <span class="verse">17:4</span> Drink from the stream; I have already told the ravens to bring you food there.” <span class="verse">17:5</span> So he carried out the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message; he went and lived in the Kerith Valley near the Jordan. <span class="verse">17:6</span> The ravens would bring him bread and meat each morning and evening, and he would drink from the stream. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:7</span> After a while, the stream dried up because there had been no rain in the land. <span class="verse">17:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to him, <span class="verse">17:9</span> “Get up, go to Zarephath in Sidonian territory, and live there. I have already told a widow who lives there to provide for you.” <span class="verse">17:10</span> So he got up and went to Zarephath. When he went through the city gate, there was a widow gathering wood. He called out to her, “Please give me a little water in a cup, so I can take a drink.” <span class="verse">17:11</span> As she went to get it, he called out to her, “Please bring me a piece of bread.” <span class="verse">17:12</span> She said, “As certainly as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God lives, I have no food, except for a handful of flour in a jar and a little olive oil in a jug. Right now I am gathering a couple of sticks for a fire. Then I’m going home to make one final meal for my son and myself. After we have eaten that, we will die of starvation.” <span class="verse">17:13</span> Elijah said to her, “Don’t be afraid. Go and do as you planned. But first make me a small cake and bring it to me; then make something for yourself and your son. <span class="verse">17:14</span> For this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel has said: ‘The jar of flour will not be empty and the jug of oil will not run out until the day the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> makes it rain on the surface of the ground.’” <span class="verse">17:15</span> She went and did as Elijah told her; there was always enough food for Elijah and for her and her family. <span class="verse">17:16</span> The jar of flour was never empty and the jug of oil never ran out, in keeping with the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message that he had spoken through Elijah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:17</span> After this the son of the woman who owned the house got sick. His illness was so severe he could no longer breathe. <span class="verse">17:18</span> She asked Elijah, “Why, prophet, have you come to me to confront me with my sin and kill my son?” <span class="verse">17:19</span> He said to her, “Hand me your son.” He took him from her arms, carried him to the upper room where he was staying, and laid him down on his bed. <span class="verse">17:20</span> Then he called out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my God, are you also bringing disaster on this widow I am staying with by killing her son?” <span class="verse">17:21</span> He stretched out over the boy three times and called out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my God, please let this boy’s breath return to him.” <span class="verse">17:22</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> answered Elijah’s prayer; the boy’s breath returned to him and he lived. <span class="verse">17:23</span> Elijah took the boy, brought him down from the upper room to the house, and handed him to his mother. Elijah then said, “See, your son is alive!” <span class="verse">17:24</span> The woman said to Elijah, “Now I know that you are a prophet and that the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message really does come through you.” </p>

</body>
</html>