<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lament for the Princes of Israel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:1</span> “And you, sing a lament for the princes of Israel, <span class="verse">19:2</span> and say: </p>
<p class="poetry">“‘What a lioness was your mother among the lions!</p>
<p class="poetry">She lay among young lions; she reared her cubs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:3</span> She reared one of her cubs; he became a young lion.</p>
<p class="poetry">He learned to tear prey; he devoured people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:4</span> The nations heard about him; he was trapped in their pit.</p>
<p class="poetry">They brought him with hooks to the land of Egypt. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">19:5</span> “‘When she realized that she waited in vain, her hope was lost. </p>
<p class="poetry">She took another of her cubs and made him a young lion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:6</span> He walked about among the lions; he became a young lion.</p>
<p class="poetry">He learned to tear prey; he devoured people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:7</span> He broke down their strongholds and devastated their cities.</p>
<p class="poetry">The land and everything in it was frightened at the sound of his roaring. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:8</span> The nations—the surrounding regions—attacked him.</p>
<p class="poetry">They threw their net over him; he was caught in their pit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:9</span> They put him in a collar with hooks; </p>
<p class="poetry">they brought him to the king of Babylon;</p>
<p class="poetry">they brought him to prison </p>
<p class="poetry">so that his voice would not be heard </p>
<p class="poetry">any longer on the mountains of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">19:10</span> “‘Your mother was like a vine in your vineyard, planted by water.</p>
<p class="poetry">It was fruitful and full of branches because it was well-watered. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:11</span> Its boughs were strong, fit for rulers’ scepters; it reached up into the clouds.</p>
<p class="poetry">It stood out because of its height and its many branches. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:12</span> But it was plucked up in anger; it was thrown down to the ground.</p>
<p class="poetry">The east wind dried up its fruit;</p>
<p class="poetry">its strong branches broke off and withered—</p>
<p class="poetry">a fire consumed them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:13</span> Now it is planted in the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">in a dry and thirsty land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">19:14</span> A fire has gone out from its branch; it has consumed its shoot and its fruit. </p>
<p class="poetry">No strong branch was left in it, nor a scepter to rule.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext">“This is a lament song, and has become a lament song.”</p>

</body>
</html>