<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 42</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 42</h2><p class="paragraphtitle"><b>Book 2<br />(Psalms 42-72)</b></p><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a well-written song by the Korahites.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:1</span> As a deer longs for streams of water,</p>
<p class="poetry">so I long for you, O God! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:2</span> I thirst for God,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the living God.</p>
<p class="poetry">I say, “When will I be able to go and appear in God’s presence?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:3</span> I cannot eat; I weep day and night. </p>
<p class="poetry">All day long they say to me, “Where is your God?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:4</span> I will remember and weep. </p>
<p class="poetry">For I was once walking along with the great throng to the temple of God,</p>
<p class="poetry">shouting and giving thanks along with the crowd as we celebrated the holy festival. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:5</span> Why are you depressed, O my soul? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why are you upset? </p>
<p class="poetry">Wait for God!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I will again give thanks</p>
<p class="poetry">to my God for his saving intervention. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:6</span> I am depressed, </p>
<p class="poetry">so I will pray to you while in the region of the upper Jordan, </p>
<p class="poetry">from Hermon, from Mount Mizar. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:7</span> One deep stream calls out to another at the sound of your waterfalls; </p>
<p class="poetry">all your billows and waves overwhelm me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:8</span> By day the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> decrees his loyal love, </p>
<p class="poetry">and by night he gives me a song, </p>
<p class="poetry">a prayer to the God of my life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:9</span> I will pray to God, my high ridge: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Why do you ignore me?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why must I walk around mourning </p>
<p class="poetry">because my enemies oppress me?”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:10</span> My enemies’ taunts cut me to the bone, </p>
<p class="poetry">as they say to me all day long, “Where is your God?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">42:11</span> Why are you depressed, O my soul? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why are you upset? </p>
<p class="poetry">Wait for God!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I will again give thanks</p>
<p class="poetry">to my God for his saving intervention. </p>

</body>
</html>