<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Timothy 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Timothy<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Qualifications for Overseers and Deacons</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> This saying is trustworthy: “If someone aspires to the office of overseer, he desires a good work.” <span class="verse">3:2</span> The overseer then must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, an able teacher, <span class="verse">3:3</span> not a drunkard, not violent, but gentle, not contentious, free from the love of money. <span class="verse">3:4</span> He must manage his own household well and keep his children in control without losing his dignity. <span class="verse">3:5</span> But if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how will he care for the church of God? <span class="verse">3:6</span> He must not be a recent convert or he may become arrogant and fall into the punishment that the devil will exact. <span class="verse">3:7</span> And he must be well thought of by those outside the faith, so that he may not fall into disgrace and be caught by the devil’s trap. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:8</span> Deacons likewise must be dignified, not two-faced, not given to excessive drinking, not greedy for gain, <span class="verse">3:9</span> holding to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience. <span class="verse">3:10</span> And these also must be tested first and then let them serve as deacons if they are found blameless. <span class="verse">3:11</span> Likewise also their wives must be dignified, not slanderous, temperate, faithful in every respect. <span class="verse">3:12</span> Deacons must be husbands of one wife and good managers of their children and their own households. <span class="verse">3:13</span> For those who have served well as deacons gain a good standing for themselves and great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conduct in God’s Church</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:14</span> I hope to come to you soon, but I am writing these instructions to you <span class="verse">3:15</span> in case I am delayed, to let you know how people ought to conduct themselves in the household of God, because it is the church of the living God, the support and bulwark of the truth. <span class="verse">3:16</span> And we all agree, our religion contains amazing revelation: </p>
<p class="poetry">He was revealed in the flesh,</p>
<p class="poetry">vindicated by the Spirit, </p>
<p class="poetry">seen by angels,</p>
<p class="poetry">proclaimed among Gentiles,</p>
<p class="poetry">believed on in the world,</p>
<p class="poetry">taken up in glory. </p>

</body>
</html>