<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) John 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus as the Good Shepherd</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> “I tell you the solemn truth, the one who does not enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs in some other way, is a thief and a robber. <span class="verse">10:2</span> The one who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. <span class="verse">10:3</span> The doorkeeper opens the door for him, and the sheep hear his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. <span class="verse">10:4</span> When he has brought all his own sheep out, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they recognize his voice. <span class="verse">10:5</span> They will never follow a stranger, but will run away from him, because they do not recognize the stranger’s voice.” <span class="verse">10:6</span> Jesus told them this parable, but they did not understand what he was saying to them. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:7</span> So Jesus said again, “I tell you the solemn truth, I am the door for the sheep. <span class="verse">10:8</span> All who came before me were thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. <span class="verse">10:9</span> I am the door. If anyone enters through me, he will be saved, and will come in and go out, and find pasture. <span class="verse">10:10</span> The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; I have come so that they may have life, and may have it abundantly. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:11</span> “I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. <span class="verse">10:12</span> The hired hand, who is not a shepherd and does not own sheep, sees the wolf coming and abandons the sheep and runs away. So the wolf attacks the sheep and scatters them. <span class="verse">10:13</span> Because he is a hired hand and is not concerned about the sheep, he runs away. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:14</span> “I am the good shepherd. I know my own and my own know me— <span class="verse">10:15</span> just as the Father knows me and I know the Father—and I lay down my life for the sheep. <span class="verse">10:16</span> I have other sheep that do not come from this sheepfold. I must bring them too, and they will listen to my voice, so that there will be one flock and one shepherd. <span class="verse">10:17</span> This is why the Father loves me —because I lay down my life, so that I may take it back again. <span class="verse">10:18</span> No one takes it away from me, but I lay it down of my own free will. I have the authority to lay it down, and I have the authority to take it back again. This commandment I received from my Father.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:19</span> Another sharp division took place among the Jewish people because of these words. <span class="verse">10:20</span> Many of them were saying, “He is possessed by a demon and has lost his mind! Why do you listen to him?” <span class="verse">10:21</span> Others said, “These are not the words of someone possessed by a demon. A demon cannot cause the blind to see, can it?” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus at the Feast of Dedication</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:22</span> Then came the feast of the Dedication in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">10:23</span> It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple area in Solomon’s Portico. <span class="verse">10:24</span> The Jewish leaders surrounded him and asked, “How long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.” <span class="verse">10:25</span> Jesus replied, “I told you and you do not believe. The deeds I do in my Father’s name testify about me. <span class="verse">10:26</span> But you refuse to believe because you are not my sheep. <span class="verse">10:27</span> My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. <span class="verse">10:28</span> I give them eternal life, and they will never perish; no one will snatch them from my hand. <span class="verse">10:29</span> My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, and no one can snatch them from my Father’s hand. <span class="verse">10:30</span> The Father and I are one.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:31</span> The Jewish leaders picked up rocks again to stone him to death. <span class="verse">10:32</span> Jesus said to them, “I have shown you many good deeds from the Father. For which one of them are you going to stone me?” <span class="verse">10:33</span> The Jewish leaders replied, “We are not going to stone you for a good deed but for blasphemy, because you, a man, are claiming to be God.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:34</span> Jesus answered, “Is it not written in your law, ‘<b><i>I said, you are gods</i></b>’? <span class="verse">10:35</span> If those people to whom the word of God came were called ‘gods’ (and the scripture cannot be broken), <span class="verse">10:36</span> do you say about the one whom the Father set apart and sent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’? <span class="verse">10:37</span> If I do not perform the deeds of my Father, do not believe me. <span class="verse">10:38</span> But if I do them, even if you do not believe me, believe the deeds, so that you may come to know and understand that I am in the Father and the Father is in me.” <span class="verse">10:39</span> Then they attempted again to seize him, but he escaped their clutches. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:40</span> Jesus went back across the Jordan River again to the place where John had been baptizing at an earlier time, and he stayed there. <span class="verse">10:41</span> Many came to him and began to say, “John performed no miraculous sign, but everything John said about this man was true!” <span class="verse">10:42</span> And many believed in Jesus there. </p>

</body>
</html>