<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 39</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 39</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, Jeduthun; a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:1</span> I decided, “I will watch what I say</p>
<p class="poetry">and make sure I do not sin with my tongue. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will put a muzzle over my mouth</p>
<p class="poetry">while in the presence of an evil person.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:2</span> I was stone silent; </p>
<p class="poetry">I held back the urge to speak. </p>
<p class="poetry">My frustration grew; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:3</span> my anxiety intensified. </p>
<p class="poetry">As I thought about it, I became impatient. </p>
<p class="poetry">Finally I spoke these words: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:4</span> “O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, help me understand my mortality</p>
<p class="poetry">and the brevity of life. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let me realize how quickly my life will pass. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:5</span> Look, you make my days short-lived, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my life span is nothing from your perspective. </p>
<p class="poetry">Surely all people, even those who seem secure, are nothing but vapor. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:6</span> Surely people go through life as mere ghosts. </p>
<p class="poetry">Surely they accumulate worthless wealth</p>
<p class="poetry">without knowing who will eventually haul it away.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:7</span> But now, O Lord, upon what am I relying?</p>
<p class="poetry">You are my only hope! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:8</span> Deliver me from all my sins of rebellion.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not make me the object of fools’ insults. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:9</span> I am silent and cannot open my mouth</p>
<p class="poetry">because of what you have done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:10</span> Please stop wounding me. </p>
<p class="poetry">You have almost beaten me to death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:11</span> You severely discipline people for their sins; </p>
<p class="poetry">like a moth you slowly devour their strength. </p>
<p class="poetry">Surely all people are a mere vapor. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:12</span> Hear my prayer, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen to my cry for help.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not ignore my sobbing. </p>
<p class="poetry">For I am a resident foreigner with you,</p>
<p class="poetry">a temporary settler, just as all my ancestors were. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">39:13</span> Turn your angry gaze away from me, so I can be happy</p>
<p class="poetry">before I pass away. </p>

</body>
</html>