<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Zophar’s First Speech to Job </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> Then Zophar the Naamathite spoke up and said: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:2</span> “Should not this abundance of words be answered, </p>
<p class="poetry">or should this talkative man </p>
<p class="poetry">be vindicated? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:3</span> Should people remain silent at your idle talk, </p>
<p class="poetry">and should no one rebuke you when you mock? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:4</span> For you have said, ‘My teaching is flawless,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I am pure in your sight.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:5</span> But if only God would speak, </p>
<p class="poetry">if only he would open his lips against you, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:6</span> and reveal to you the secrets of wisdom—</p>
<p class="poetry">for true wisdom has two sides —</p>
<p class="poetry">so that you would know </p>
<p class="poetry">that God has forgiven some of your sins. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">11:7</span> “Can you discover the essence of God?</p>
<p class="poetry">Can you find out the perfection of the Almighty? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:8</span> It is higher than the heavens—what can you do?</p>
<p class="poetry">It is deeper than Sheol —what can you know? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:9</span> Its measure is longer than the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">and broader than the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:10</span> If he comes by and confines you </p>
<p class="poetry">and convenes a court, </p>
<p class="poetry">then who can prevent him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:11</span> For he knows deceitful men;</p>
<p class="poetry">when he sees evil, will he not consider it? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:12</span> But an empty man will become wise,</p>
<p class="poetry">when a wild donkey’s colt is born a human being. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">11:13</span> “As for you, if you prove faithful, </p>
<p class="poetry">and if you stretch out your hands toward him, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:14</span> if iniquity is in your hand—put it far away, </p>
<p class="poetry">and do not let evil reside in your tents. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:15</span> For then you will lift up your face </p>
<p class="poetry">without blemish; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will be securely established </p>
<p class="poetry">and will not fear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:16</span> For you will forget your trouble; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will remember it </p>
<p class="poetry">like water that has flowed away.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:17</span> And life will be brighter than the noonday;</p>
<p class="poetry">though there be darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">it will be like the morning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:18</span> And you will be secure, because there is hope;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will be protected </p>
<p class="poetry">and will take your rest in safety. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:19</span> You will lie down with no one to make you afraid, </p>
<p class="poetry">and many will seek your favor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:20</span> But the eyes of the wicked fail, </p>
<p class="poetry">and escape eludes them;</p>
<p class="poetry">their one hope is to breathe their last.” </p>

</body>
</html>