<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judah is Justly Deserving of Coming Judgment</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Go up and down through the streets of Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry">Look around and see for yourselves.</p>
<p class="poetry">Search through its public squares.</p>
<p class="poetry">See if any of you can find a single person</p>
<p class="poetry">who deals honestly and tries to be truthful. </p>
<p class="poetry">If you can, then I will not punish this city. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> These people make promises in the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry">But the fact is, what they swear to is really a lie.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I know you look for faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry">But even when you punish these people, they feel no remorse. </p>
<p class="poetry">Even when you nearly destroy them, they refuse to be corrected.</p>
<p class="poetry">They have become as hardheaded as a rock. </p>
<p class="poetry">They refuse to change their ways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> I thought, “Surely it is only the ignorant poor who act this way. </p>
<p class="poetry">They act like fools because they do not know what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> demands. </p>
<p class="poetry">They do not know what their God requires of them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> I will go to the leaders </p>
<p class="poetry">and speak with them.</p>
<p class="poetry">Surely they know what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> demands. </p>
<p class="poetry">Surely they know what their God requires of them.” </p>
<p class="poetry">Yet all of them, too, have rejected his authority</p>
<p class="poetry">and refuse to submit to him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> So like a lion from the thicket their enemies will kill them.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a wolf from the rift valley they will destroy them.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a leopard they will lie in wait outside their cities</p>
<p class="poetry">and totally destroy anyone who ventures out. </p>
<p class="poetry">For they have rebelled so much</p>
<p class="poetry">and done so many unfaithful things. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> asked, </p>
<p class="poetry">“How can I leave you unpunished, Jerusalem? </p>
<p class="poetry">Your people have rejected me</p>
<p class="poetry">and have worshiped gods that are not gods at all. </p>
<p class="poetry">Even though I supplied all their needs, they were like an unfaithful wife to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">They went flocking to the houses of prostitutes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> They are like lusty, well-fed stallions.</p>
<p class="poetry">Each of them lusts after his neighbor’s wife. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> I will surely punish them for doing such things!” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will surely bring retribution on such a nation as this!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded the enemy, </p>
<p class="poetry">“March through the vineyards of Israel and Judah and ruin them. </p>
<p class="poetry">But do not destroy them completely.</p>
<p class="poetry">Strip off their branches</p>
<p class="poetry">for these people do not belong to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> For the nations of Israel and Judah </p>
<p class="poetry">have been very unfaithful to me,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> “These people have denied what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says. </p>
<p class="poetry">They have said, ‘That is not so! </p>
<p class="poetry">No harm will come to us.</p>
<p class="poetry">We will not experience war and famine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> The prophets will prove to be full of wind. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has not spoken through them. </p>
<p class="poetry">So, let what they say happen to them.’”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:14</span> Because of that, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies said to me: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Because these people have spoken like this, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make the words that I put in your mouth like fire.</p>
<p class="poetry">And I will make this people like wood, </p>
<p class="poetry">which the fiery judgments you speak will burn up.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, “Listen, nation of Israel! </p>
<p class="poetry">I am about to bring a nation from far away to attack you.</p>
<p class="poetry">It will be a nation that was founded long ago</p>
<p class="poetry">and has lasted for a long time.</p>
<p class="poetry">It will be a nation whose language you will not know.</p>
<p class="poetry">Its people will speak words that you will not be able to understand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:16</span> All its soldiers are strong and mighty. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their arrows will send you to your grave. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:17</span> They will eat up your crops and your food.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will kill off your sons and your daughters.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will eat up your sheep and your cattle.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will destroy your vines and your fig trees. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their weapons will batter down </p>
<p class="poetry">the fortified cities you trust in.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:18</span> “Yet even then I will not completely destroy you,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">5:19</span> “So then, Jeremiah, when your people ask, ‘Why has the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God done all this to us?’ tell them, ‘It is because you rejected me and served foreign gods in your own land. So you must serve foreigners in a land that does not belong to you.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:20</span> “Proclaim this message among the descendants of Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry">Make it known throughout Judah. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:21</span> Tell them: ‘Hear this,</p>
<p class="poetry">you foolish people who have no understanding,</p>
<p class="poetry">who have eyes but do not discern,</p>
<p class="poetry">who have ears but do not perceive: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:22</span> ‘You should fear me!’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">‘You should tremble in awe before me! </p>
<p class="poetry">I made the sand to be a boundary for the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">a permanent barrier that it can never cross.</p>
<p class="poetry">Its waves may roll, but they can never prevail.</p>
<p class="poetry">They may roar, but they can never cross beyond that boundary.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:23</span> But these people have stubborn and rebellious hearts.</p>
<p class="poetry">They have turned aside and gone their own way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:24</span> They do not say to themselves, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Let us revere the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God.</p>
<p class="poetry">It is he who gives us the autumn rains and the spring rains at the proper time.</p>
<p class="poetry">It is he who assures us of the regular weeks of harvest.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:25</span> Your misdeeds have stopped these things from coming. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your sins have deprived you of my bounty.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:26</span> Indeed, there are wicked scoundrels among my people.</p>
<p class="poetry">They lie in wait like bird catchers hiding in ambush. </p>
<p class="poetry">They set deadly traps to catch people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:27</span> Like a cage filled with the birds that have been caught, </p>
<p class="poetry">their houses are filled with the gains of their fraud and deceit. </p>
<p class="poetry">That is how they have gotten so rich and powerful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:28</span> That is how they have grown fat and sleek. </p>
<p class="poetry">There is no limit to the evil things they do. </p>
<p class="poetry">They do not plead the cause of the fatherless in such a way as to win it.</p>
<p class="poetry">They do not defend the rights of the poor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:29</span> I will certainly punish them for doing such things!” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will certainly bring retribution on such a nation as this! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:30</span> Something horrible and shocking</p>
<p class="poetry">is going on in the land of Judah:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:31</span> The prophets prophesy lies.</p>
<p class="poetry">The priests exercise power by their own authority. </p>
<p class="poetry">And my people love to have it this way.</p>
<p class="poetry">But they will not be able to help you when the time of judgment comes! </p>

</body>
</html>