<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:1</span> A gentle response turns away anger,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a harsh word stirs up wrath. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:2</span> The tongue of the wise treats knowledge correctly, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the mouth of the fool spouts out folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:3</span> The eyes of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> are in every place,</p>
<p class="poetry">keeping watch on those who are evil and those who are good. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:4</span> Speech that heals is like a life-giving tree, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a perverse speech breaks the spirit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:5</span> A fool rejects his father’s discipline,</p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever heeds reproof shows good sense. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:6</span> In the house of the righteous is abundant wealth, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the income of the wicked will be ruined. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:7</span> The lips of the wise spread knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">but not so the heart of fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors the sacrifice of the wicked, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the prayer of the upright pleases him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors the way of the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he will love those who pursue righteousness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:10</span> Severe discipline is for the one who abandons the way;</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who hates reproof will die. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:11</span> Death and Destruction are before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—</p>
<p class="poetry">how much more the hearts of humans! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:12</span> The scorner will not love one who corrects him; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will not go to the wise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:13</span> A joyful heart makes the face cheerful, </p>
<p class="poetry">but by a painful heart the spirit is broken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:14</span> The discerning mind seeks knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the mouth of fools feeds on folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:15</span> All the days of the afflicted are bad, </p>
<p class="poetry">but one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:16</span> Better is little with the fear of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">than great wealth and turmoil with it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:17</span> Better a meal of vegetables where there is love </p>
<p class="poetry">than a fattened ox where there is hatred. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:18</span> A quick-tempered person stirs up dissension,</p>
<p class="poetry">but one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:19</span> The way of the sluggard is like a hedge of thorns, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the path of the upright is like a highway. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:20</span> A wise child brings joy to his father,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a foolish person despises his mother. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:21</span> Folly is a joy to one who lacks sense, </p>
<p class="poetry">but one who has understanding follows an upright course. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:22</span> Plans fail when there is no counsel,</p>
<p class="poetry">but with abundant advisers they are established. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:23</span> A person has joy in giving an appropriate answer, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a word at the right time —how good it is!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:24</span> The path of life is upward for the wise person, </p>
<p class="poetry">to keep him from going downward to Sheol. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:25</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> tears down the house of the proud, </p>
<p class="poetry">but he maintains the boundaries of the widow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:26</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> abhors the plans of the wicked, </p>
<p class="poetry">but pleasant words are pure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:27</span> The one who is greedy for gain troubles his household, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever hates bribes will live. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:28</span> The heart of the righteous considers how to answer, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:29</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is far from the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he hears the prayer of the righteous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:30</span> A bright look brings joy to the heart,</p>
<p class="poetry">and good news gives health to the body. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:31</span> The person who hears the reproof that leads to life </p>
<p class="poetry">is at home among the wise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:32</span> The one who refuses correction despises himself, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever listens to reproof acquires understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:33</span> The fear of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> provides wise instruction, </p>
<p class="poetry">and before honor comes humility. </p>

</body>
</html>