<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 73</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 73</h2><p class="paragraphtitle"><b>Book 3<br />(Psalms 73-89)</b></p><p class="psasuper">A psalm by Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:1</span> Certainly God is good to Israel, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to those whose motives are pure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:2</span> But as for me, my feet almost slipped;</p>
<p class="poetry">my feet almost slid out from under me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:3</span> For I envied those who are proud,</p>
<p class="poetry">as I observed the prosperity of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:4</span> For they suffer no pain; </p>
<p class="poetry">their bodies are strong and well fed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:5</span> They are immune to the trouble common to men;</p>
<p class="poetry">they do not suffer as other men do. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:6</span> Arrogance is their necklace, </p>
<p class="poetry">and violence covers them like clothing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:7</span> Their prosperity causes them to do wrong; </p>
<p class="poetry">their thoughts are sinful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:8</span> They mock and say evil things; </p>
<p class="poetry">they proudly threaten violence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:9</span> They speak as if they rule in heaven,</p>
<p class="poetry">and lay claim to the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:10</span> Therefore they have more than enough food to eat,</p>
<p class="poetry">and even suck up the water of the sea. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:11</span> They say, “How does God know what we do?</p>
<p class="poetry">Is the Most High aware of what goes on?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:12</span> Take a good look. This is what the wicked are like, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who always have it so easy and get richer and richer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:13</span> I concluded, “Surely in vain I have kept my motives pure</p>
<p class="poetry">and maintained a pure lifestyle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:14</span> I suffer all day long,</p>
<p class="poetry">and am punished every morning.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:15</span> If I had publicized these thoughts, </p>
<p class="poetry">I would have betrayed your people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:16</span> When I tried to make sense of this,</p>
<p class="poetry">it was troubling to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:17</span> Then I entered the precincts of God’s temple, </p>
<p class="poetry">and understood the destiny of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:18</span> Surely you put them in slippery places;</p>
<p class="poetry">you bring them down to ruin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:19</span> How desolate they become in a mere moment.</p>
<p class="poetry">Terrifying judgments make their demise complete. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:20</span> They are like a dream after one wakes up. </p>
<p class="poetry">O Lord, when you awake you will despise them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:21</span> Yes, my spirit was bitter, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my insides felt sharp pain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:22</span> I was ignorant and lacked insight; </p>
<p class="poetry">I was as senseless as an animal before you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:23</span> But I am continually with you;</p>
<p class="poetry">you hold my right hand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:24</span> You guide me by your wise advice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and then you will lead me to a position of honor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:25</span> Whom do I have in heaven but you?</p>
<p class="poetry">On earth there is no one I desire but you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:26</span> My flesh and my heart may grow weak, </p>
<p class="poetry">but God always protects my heart and gives me stability. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:27</span> Yes, look! Those far from you die;</p>
<p class="poetry">you destroy everyone who is unfaithful to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">73:28</span> But as for me, God’s presence is all I need. </p>
<p class="poetry">I have made the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> my shelter,</p>
<p class="poetry">as I declare all the things you have done. </p>

</body>
</html>