<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Brings the Ark to Jerusalem</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> David constructed buildings in the City of David; he then prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it. <span class="verse">15:2</span> Then David said, “Only the Levites may carry the ark of God, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> chose them to carry the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and to serve before him perpetually.” <span class="verse">15:3</span> David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem to bring the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> up to the place he had prepared for it. <span class="verse">15:4</span> David gathered together the descendants of Aaron and the Levites: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:5</span> From the descendants of Kohath: Uriel the leader and 120 of his relatives. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:6</span> From the descendants of Merari: Asaiah the leader and 220 of his relatives. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:7</span> From the descendants of Gershom: Joel the leader and 130 of his relatives. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:8</span> From the descendants of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the leader and 200 of his relatives. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:9</span> From the descendants of Hebron: Eliel the leader and 80 of his relatives. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:10</span> From the descendants of Uzziel: Amminadab the leader and 112 of his relatives. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:11</span> David summoned the priests Zadok and Abiathar, along with the Levites Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab. <span class="verse">15:12</span> He told them: “You are the leaders of the Levites’ families. You and your relatives must consecrate yourselves and bring the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel up to the place I have prepared for it. <span class="verse">15:13</span> The first time you did not carry it; that is why the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God attacked us, because we did not ask him about the proper way to carry it.” <span class="verse">15:14</span> The priests and Levites consecrated themselves so they could bring up the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel. <span class="verse">15:15</span> The descendants of Levi carried the ark of God on their shoulders with poles, just as Moses had commanded in keeping with the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s instruction. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:16</span> David told the leaders of the Levites to appoint some of their relatives as musicians; they were to play various instruments, including stringed instruments and cymbals, and to sing loudly and joyfully. <span class="verse">15:17</span> So the Levites appointed Heman son of Joel; one of his relatives, Asaph son of Berechiah; one of the descendants of Merari, Ethan son of Kushaiah; <span class="verse">15:18</span> along with some of their relatives who were second in rank, including Zechariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, the gatekeepers. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:19</span> The musicians Heman, Asaph, and Ethan were to sound the bronze cymbals; <span class="verse">15:20</span> Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah were to play the harps according to the <i>alamoth</i> style; <span class="verse">15:21</span> Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, Jeiel, and Azaziah were to play the lyres according to the <i>sheminith</i> style, as led by the director; <span class="verse">15:22</span> Kenaniah, the leader of the Levites, was in charge of transport, for he was well-informed on this matter; <span class="verse">15:23</span> Berechiah and Elkanah were guardians of the ark; <span class="verse">15:24</span> Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer the priests were to blow the trumpets before the ark of God; Obed-Edom and Jehiel were also guardians of the ark. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:25</span> So David, the leaders of Israel, and the commanders of units of a thousand went to bring up the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s covenant from the house of Obed-Edom with celebration. <span class="verse">15:26</span> When God helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s covenant, they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams. <span class="verse">15:27</span> David was wrapped in a linen robe, as were all the Levites carrying the ark, the musicians, and Kenaniah the supervisor of transport and the musicians; David also wore a linen ephod. <span class="verse">15:28</span> All Israel brought up the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s covenant; they were shouting, blowing trumpets, sounding cymbals, and playing stringed instruments. <span class="verse">15:29</span> As the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s covenant entered the City of David, Michal, Saul’s daughter, looked out the window. When she saw King David jumping and celebrating, she despised him. </p>

</body>
</html>