<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Organizes the Levites</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> When David was old and approaching the end of his life, he made his son Solomon king over Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:2</span> David assembled all the leaders of Israel, along with the priests and the Levites. <span class="verse">23:3</span> The Levites who were thirty years old and up were counted; there were 38,000 men. <span class="verse">23:4</span> David said, “Of these, 24,000 are to direct the work of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple; 6,000 are to be officials and judges; <span class="verse">23:5</span> 4,000 are to be gatekeepers; and 4,000 are to praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with the instruments I supplied for worship.” <span class="verse">23:6</span> David divided them into groups corresponding to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:7</span> The Gershonites included Ladan and Shimei. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:8</span> The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the oldest, Zetham, and Joel—three in all.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:9</span> The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran—three in all.</p>
<p class="bodytext">These were the leaders of the family of Ladan. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:10</span> The sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, Jeush, and Beriah. These were Shimei’s sons—four in all. <span class="verse">23:11</span> Jahath was the oldest and Zizah the second oldest. Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons, so they were considered one family with one responsibility. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:12</span> The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel—four in all.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:13</span> The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Aaron and his descendants were chosen on a permanent basis to consecrate the most holy items, to offer sacrifices before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, to serve him, and to praise his name. <span class="verse">23:14</span> The descendants of Moses the man of God were considered Levites. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:15</span> The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:16</span> The son of Gershom: Shebuel the oldest. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:17</span> The son of Eliezer was Rehabiah, the oldest. Eliezer had no other sons, but Rehabiah had many descendants. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:18</span> The son of Izhar: Shelomith the oldest. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:19</span> The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the oldest, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:20</span> The sons of Uzziel: Micah the oldest, and Isshiah the second. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:21</span> The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:22</span> Eleazar died without having sons; he had only daughters. The sons of Kish, their cousins, married them. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:23</span> The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jeremoth—three in all.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:24</span> These were the descendants of Levi according to their families, that is, the leaders of families as counted and individually listed who carried out assigned tasks in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and were twenty years old and up. <span class="verse">23:25</span> For David said, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel has given his people rest and has permanently settled in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">23:26</span> So the Levites no longer need to carry the tabernacle or any of the items used in its service.” <span class="verse">23:27</span> According to David’s final instructions, the Levites twenty years old or older were counted. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:28</span> Their job was to help Aaron’s descendants in the service of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. They were to take care of the courtyards, the rooms, ceremonial purification of all holy items, and other jobs related to the service of God’s temple. <span class="verse">23:29</span> They also took care of the bread that is displayed, the flour for offerings, the unleavened wafers, the round cakes, the mixing, and all the measuring. <span class="verse">23:30</span> They also stood in a designated place every morning and offered thanks and praise to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. They also did this in the evening <span class="verse">23:31</span> and whenever burnt sacrifices were offered to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> on the Sabbath and at new moon festivals and assemblies. A designated number were to serve before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> regularly in accordance with regulations. <span class="verse">23:32</span> They were in charge of the meeting tent and the Holy Place, and helped their relatives, the descendants of Aaron, in the service of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple. </p>

</body>
</html>