<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Unfaithful Bride</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">16:2</span> “Son of man, confront Jerusalem with her abominable practices <span class="verse">16:3</span> and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says to Jerusalem: Your origin and your birth were in the land of the Canaanites; your father was an Amorite and your mother a Hittite. <span class="verse">16:4</span> As for your birth, on the day you were born your umbilical cord was not cut, nor were you washed in water; you were certainly not rubbed down with salt, nor wrapped with blankets. <span class="verse">16:5</span> No eye took pity on you to do even one of these things for you to spare you; you were thrown out into the open field because you were detested on the day you were born. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:6</span> “‘I passed by you and saw you kicking around helplessly in your blood. I said to you as you lay there in your blood, “Live!” I said to you as you lay there in your blood, “Live!” <span class="verse">16:7</span> I made you plentiful like sprouts in a field; you grew tall and came of age so that you could wear jewelry. Your breasts had formed and your hair had grown, but you were still naked and bare. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:8</span> “‘Then I passed by you and watched you, noticing that you had reached the age for love. I spread my cloak over you and covered your nakedness. I swore a solemn oath to you and entered into a marriage covenant with you, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and you became mine.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:9</span> “‘Then I bathed you in water, washed the blood off you, and anointed you with fragrant oil. <span class="verse">16:10</span> I dressed you in embroidered clothing and put fine leather sandals on your feet. I wrapped you with fine linen and covered you with silk. <span class="verse">16:11</span> I adorned you with jewelry. I put bracelets on your hands and a necklace around your neck. <span class="verse">16:12</span> I put a ring in your nose, earrings on your ears, and a beautiful crown on your head. <span class="verse">16:13</span> You were adorned with gold and silver, while your clothing was of fine linen, silk, and embroidery. You ate the finest flour, honey, and olive oil. You became extremely beautiful and attained the position of royalty. <span class="verse">16:14</span> Your fame spread among the nations because of your beauty; your beauty was perfect because of the splendor that I bestowed on you, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:15</span> “‘But you trusted in your beauty and capitalized on your fame by becoming a prostitute. You offered your sexual favors to every man who passed by so that your beauty became his. <span class="verse">16:16</span> You took some of your clothing and made for yourself decorated high places; you engaged in prostitution on them. You went to him to become his. <span class="verse">16:17</span> You also took your beautiful jewelry, made of my gold and my silver I had given to you, and made for yourself male images and engaged in prostitution with them. <span class="verse">16:18</span> You took your embroidered clothing and used it to cover them; you offered my olive oil and my incense to them. <span class="verse">16:19</span> As for my food that I gave you—the fine flour, olive oil, and honey I fed you—you placed it before them as a soothing aroma. That is exactly what happened, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:20</span> “‘You took your sons and your daughters whom you bore to me and you sacrificed them as food for the idols to eat. As if your prostitution was not enough, <span class="verse">16:21</span> you slaughtered my children and sacrificed them to the idols. <span class="verse">16:22</span> And with all your abominable practices and prostitution you did not remember the days of your youth when you were naked and bare, kicking around in your blood. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:23</span> “‘After all your evil—“Woe! Woe to you!” declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>— <span class="verse">16:24</span> you built yourself a chamber and put up a pavilion in every public square. <span class="verse">16:25</span> At the head of every street you erected your pavilion, and you disgraced your beauty when you spread your legs to every passerby and multiplied your promiscuity. <span class="verse">16:26</span> You engaged in prostitution with the Egyptians, your lustful neighbors, multiplying your promiscuity and provoking me to anger. <span class="verse">16:27</span> So see here, I have stretched out my hand against you and cut off your rations. I have delivered you into the power of those who hate you, the daughters of the Philistines, who were ashamed of your obscene conduct. <span class="verse">16:28</span> You engaged in prostitution with the Assyrians because your desires were insatiable; you prostituted yourself with them and yet you were still not satisfied. <span class="verse">16:29</span> Then you multiplied your promiscuity to the land of merchants, Babylonia, but you were not satisfied there either. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:30</span> “‘How sick is your heart, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, when you perform all these acts, the deeds of a bold prostitute. <span class="verse">16:31</span> When you built your chamber at the head of every street and put up your pavilion in every public square, you were not like a prostitute, because you scoffed at payment. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:32</span> “‘Adulterous wife, who prefers strangers instead of her own husband! <span class="verse">16:33</span> All prostitutes receive payment, but instead you give gifts to every one of your lovers. You bribe them to come to you from all around for your sexual favors! <span class="verse">16:34</span> You were different from other prostitutes because no one solicited you. When you gave payment and no payment was given to you, you became the opposite! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:35</span> “‘Therefore, you prostitute, listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message! <span class="verse">16:36</span> This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Because your lust was poured out and your nakedness was uncovered in your prostitution with your lovers, and because of all your detestable idols, and because of the blood of your children you have given to them, <span class="verse">16:37</span> therefore, take note: I am about to gather all your lovers whom you enjoyed, both all those you loved and all those you hated. I will gather them against you from all around, and I will expose your nakedness to them, and they will see all your nakedness. <span class="verse">16:38</span> I will punish you as an adulteress and murderer deserves. I will avenge your bloody deeds with furious rage. <span class="verse">16:39</span> I will give you into their hands, and they will destroy your chambers and tear down your pavilions. They will strip you of your clothing and take your beautiful jewelry and leave you naked and bare. <span class="verse">16:40</span> They will summon a mob who will stone you and hack you in pieces with their swords. <span class="verse">16:41</span> They will burn down your houses and execute judgments on you in front of many women. Thus I will put a stop to your prostitution, and you will no longer give gifts to your clients. <span class="verse">16:42</span> I will exhaust my rage on you, and then my fury will turn from you. I will calm down and no longer be angry. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:43</span> “‘Because you did not remember the days of your youth and have enraged me with all these deeds, I hereby repay you for what you have done, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Have you not engaged in prostitution on top of all your other abominable practices? </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:44</span> “‘Observe—everyone who quotes proverbs will quote this proverb about you: “Like mother, like daughter.” <span class="verse">16:45</span> You are the daughter of your mother, who detested her husband and her sons, and you are the sister of your sisters, who detested their husbands and their sons. Your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite. <span class="verse">16:46</span> Your older sister was Samaria, who lived north of you with her daughters, and your younger sister, who lived south of you, was Sodom with her daughters. <span class="verse">16:47</span> Have you not copied their behavior and practiced their abominable deeds? In a short time you became even more depraved in all your conduct than they were! <span class="verse">16:48</span> As surely as I live, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, your sister Sodom and her daughters never behaved as wickedly as you and your daughters have behaved. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:49</span> “‘See here—this was the iniquity of your sister Sodom: She and her daughters had majesty, abundance of food, and enjoyed carefree ease, but they did not help the poor and needy. <span class="verse">16:50</span> They were haughty and practiced abominable deeds before me. Therefore, when I saw it I removed them. <span class="verse">16:51</span> Samaria has not committed half the sins you have; you have done more abominable deeds than they did. You have made your sisters appear righteous with all the abominable things you have done. <span class="verse">16:52</span> So now, bear your disgrace, because you have given your sisters reason to justify their behavior. Because the sins you have committed were more abominable than those of your sisters; they have become more righteous than you. So now, be ashamed and bear the disgrace of making your sisters appear righteous. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:53</span> “‘I will restore their fortunes, the fortunes of Sodom and her daughters, and the fortunes of Samaria and her daughters (along with your fortunes among them), <span class="verse">16:54</span> so that you may bear your disgrace and be ashamed of all you have done in consoling them. <span class="verse">16:55</span> As for your sisters, Sodom and her daughters will be restored to their former status, Samaria and her daughters will be restored to their former status, and you and your daughters will be restored to your former status. <span class="verse">16:56</span> In your days of majesty, was not Sodom your sister a byword in your mouth, <span class="verse">16:57</span> before your evil was exposed? Now you have become an object of scorn to the daughters of Aram and all those around her and to the daughters of the Philistines—those all around you who despise you. <span class="verse">16:58</span> You must bear your punishment for your obscene conduct and your abominable practices, declares the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:59</span> “‘For this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: I will deal with you according to what you have done when you despised your oath by breaking your covenant. <span class="verse">16:60</span> Yet I will remember the covenant I made with you in the days of your youth, and I will establish a lasting covenant with you. <span class="verse">16:61</span> Then you will remember your conduct, and be ashamed when you receive your older and younger sisters. I will give them to you as daughters, but not on account of my covenant with you. <span class="verse">16:62</span> I will establish my covenant with you, and then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">16:63</span> Then you will remember, be ashamed, and remain silent because of your disgrace when I make atonement for all you have done, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>

</body>
</html>