<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Isaiah’s Commission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> In the year of King Uzziah’s death, I saw the Lord seated on a high, elevated throne. The hem of his robe filled the temple. <span class="verse">6:2</span> Seraphs stood over him; each one had six wings. With two wings they covered their faces, with two they covered their feet, and they used the remaining two to fly. <span class="verse">6:3</span> They called out to one another, “Holy, holy, holy is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies! His majestic splendor fills the entire earth!” <span class="verse">6:4</span> The sound of their voices shook the door frames, and the temple was filled with smoke. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:5</span> I said, “Woe to me! I am destroyed, for my lips are contaminated by sin, and I live among people whose lips are contaminated by sin. My eyes have seen the king, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies.” <span class="verse">6:6</span> But then one of the seraphs flew toward me. In his hand was a hot coal he had taken from the altar with tongs. <span class="verse">6:7</span> He touched my mouth with it and said, “Look, this coal has touched your lips. Your evil is removed; your sin is forgiven.” <span class="verse">6:8</span> I heard the voice of the Lord say, “Whom will I send? Who will go on our behalf?” I answered, “Here I am, send me!” <span class="verse">6:9</span> He said, “Go and tell these people:</p>
<p class="poetry">“‘Listen continually, but don’t understand.</p>
<p class="poetry">Look continually, but don’t perceive.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:10</span> Make the hearts of these people calloused;</p>
<p class="poetry">make their ears deaf and their eyes blind.</p>
<p class="poetry">Otherwise they might see with their eyes and hear with their ears,</p>
<p class="poetry">their hearts might understand and they might repent and be healed.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:11</span> I replied, “How long, Lord?” He said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Until cities are in ruins and unpopulated,</p>
<p class="poetry">and houses are uninhabited, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the land is ruined and devastated, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:12</span> and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has sent the people off to a distant place,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the very heart of the land is completely abandoned. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:13</span> Even if only a tenth of the people remain in the land, </p>
<p class="poetry">it will again be destroyed, </p>
<p class="poetry">like one of the large sacred trees or an Asherah pole, </p>
<p class="poetry">when a sacred pillar on a high place is thrown down. </p>
<p class="poetry">That sacred pillar symbolizes the special chosen family.” </p>

</body>
</html>