<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:1</span> In the spring, at the time when kings normally conduct wars, Joab led the army into battle and devastated the land of the Ammonites. He went and besieged Rabbah, while David stayed in Jerusalem. Joab defeated Rabbah and tore it down. <span class="verse">20:2</span> David took the crown from the head of their king and wore it (its weight was a talent of gold and it was set with precious stones). He took a large amount of plunder from the city. <span class="verse">20:3</span> He removed the city’s residents and made them labor with saws, iron picks, and axes. This was his policy with all the Ammonite cities. Then David and all the army returned to Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Battles with the Philistines</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:4</span> Later there was a battle with the Philistines in Gezer. At that time Sibbekai the Hushathite killed Sippai, one of the descendants of the Rephaim, and the Philistines were subdued. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:5</span> There was another battle with the Philistines in which Elhanan son of Jair the Bethlehemite killed the brother of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear had a shaft as big as the crossbeam of a weaver’s loom. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:6</span> In a battle in Gath there was a large man who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot—twenty-four in all! He too was a descendant of Rapha. <span class="verse">20:7</span> When he taunted Israel, Jonathan son of Shimea, David’s brother, killed him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:8</span> These were the descendants of Rapha who lived in Gath; they were killed by the hand of David and his soldiers. </p>

</body>
</html>