<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Peter 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Peter<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wives and Husbands</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> In the same way, wives, be subject to your own husbands. Then, even if some are disobedient to the word, they will be won over without a word by the way you live, <span class="verse">3:2</span> when they see your pure and reverent conduct. <span class="verse">3:3</span> Let your beauty not be external—the braiding of hair and wearing of gold jewelry or fine clothes— <span class="verse">3:4</span> but the inner person of the heart, the lasting beauty of a gentle and tranquil spirit, which is precious in God’s sight. <span class="verse">3:5</span> For in the same way the holy women who hoped in God long ago adorned themselves by being subject to their husbands, <span class="verse">3:6</span> like Sarah who obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. You become her children when you do what is good and have no fear in doing so. <span class="verse">3:7</span> Husbands, in the same way, treat your wives with consideration as the weaker partners and show them honor as fellow heirs of the grace of life. In this way nothing will hinder your prayers. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Suffering for Doing Good</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:8</span> Finally, all of you be harmonious, sympathetic, affectionate, compassionate, and humble. <span class="verse">3:9</span> Do not return evil for evil or insult for insult, but instead bless others because you were called to inherit a blessing. <span class="verse">3:10</span> For </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>the one who wants to love life and see good days must keep</i></b> <i><b>his tongue from evil and his lips from uttering deceit</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> <b><i>And he must turn away from evil and do good;</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>he must seek peace and pursue it</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> <b><i>For the eyes of the Lord are</i></b> <i><b>upon the righteous and his ears are open to their prayer</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>But the Lord’s face is against those who do evil</b></i>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:13</span> For who is going to harm you if you are devoted to what is good? <span class="verse">3:14</span> But in fact, if you happen to suffer for doing what is right, you are blessed. <b><i>But</i></b> <b><i>do not be terrified of them</i></b> <i><b>or</b></i> <i><b>be shaken</b></i>. <span class="verse">3:15</span> But set Christ apart as Lord in your hearts and always be ready to give an answer to anyone who asks about the hope you possess. <span class="verse">3:16</span> Yet do it with courtesy and respect, keeping a good conscience, so that those who slander your good conduct in Christ may be put to shame when they accuse you. <span class="verse">3:17</span> For it is better to suffer for doing good, if God wills it, than for doing evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span>  Because Christ also suffered once for sins, </p>
<p class="poetry"><i>the just for the unjust</i>, </p>
<p class="poetry">to bring you to God, </p>
<p class="poetry">by being put to death in the flesh </p>
<p class="poetry">but by being made alive in the spirit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> In it he went and preached to the spirits in prison, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:20</span> after they were disobedient long ago when God patiently waited in the days of Noah as an ark was being constructed. In the ark a few, that is eight souls, were delivered through water. <span class="verse">3:21</span> And this prefigured baptism, which now saves you —not the washing off of physical dirt but the pledge of a good conscience to God—through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, <span class="verse">3:22</span> who went into heaven and is at the right hand of God with angels and authorities and powers subject to him. </p>

</body>
</html>