<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Appeal for Revelation</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:1</span> “I am weary of my life;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will complain freely without restraint; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:2</span> I will say to God, ‘Do not condemn me;</p>
<p class="poetry">tell me why you are contending with me.’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:3</span> Is it good for you to oppress, </p>
<p class="poetry">to despise the work of your hands,</p>
<p class="poetry">while you smile </p>
<p class="poetry">on the schemes of the wicked? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Motivations of God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:4</span> “Do you have eyes of flesh, </p>
<p class="poetry">or do you see as a human being sees? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:5</span> Are your days like the days of a mortal,</p>
<p class="poetry">or your years like the years of a mortal, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:6</span> that you must search out my iniquity,</p>
<p class="poetry">and inquire about my sin, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:7</span> although you know that I am not guilty,</p>
<p class="poetry">and that there is no one who can deliver </p>
<p class="poetry">out of your hand? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Contradictions in God’s Dealings</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:8</span> “Your hands have shaped me and made me,</p>
<p class="poetry">but now you destroy me completely. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:9</span> Remember that you have made me as with the clay;</p>
<p class="poetry">will you return me to dust? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:10</span> Did you not pour me out like milk,</p>
<p class="poetry">and curdle me like cheese? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:11</span> You clothed me with skin and flesh</p>
<p class="poetry">and knit me together with bones and sinews. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:12</span> You gave me life and favor, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your intervention watched over my spirit. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">10:13</span> “But these things you have concealed in your heart;</p>
<p class="poetry">I know that this is with you: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:14</span> If I sinned, then you would watch me</p>
<p class="poetry">and you would not acquit me of my iniquity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:15</span> If I am guilty, woe to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and if I am innocent, I cannot lift my head; </p>
<p class="poetry">I am full of shame, </p>
<p class="poetry">and satiated with my affliction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:16</span> If I lift myself up, </p>
<p class="poetry">you hunt me as a fierce lion, </p>
<p class="poetry">and again you display your power against me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:17</span> You bring new witnesses against me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and increase your anger against me;</p>
<p class="poetry">relief troops come against me. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Appeal for Relief</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:18</span> “Why then did you bring me out from the womb?</p>
<p class="poetry">I should have died </p>
<p class="poetry">and no eye would have seen me!</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:19</span> I should have been as though I had never existed; </p>
<p class="poetry">I should have been carried </p>
<p class="poetry">right from the womb to the grave! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:20</span> Are not my days few? </p>
<p class="poetry">Cease, then, and leave me alone </p>
<p class="poetry">that I may find a little comfort, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:21</span> before I depart, never to return, </p>
<p class="poetry">to the land of darkness </p>
<p class="poetry">and the deepest shadow, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:22</span> to the land of utter darkness, </p>
<p class="poetry">like the deepest darkness,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the deepest shadow and disorder, </p>
<p class="poetry">where even the light is like darkness.” </p>

</body>
</html>