<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Lamentations 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Lamentations<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">א</span> (<i>Alef</i>)</p><p class="paragraphtitle">The Prophet Speaks</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:1</span>  Alas! Gold has lost its luster; </p>
<p class="poetry">pure gold loses value. </p>
<p class="poetry">Jewels are scattered</p>
<p class="poetry">on every street corner. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ב</span> (<i>Bet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:2</span> The precious sons of Zion </p>
<p class="poetry">were worth their weight in gold—</p>
<p class="poetry">Alas!—but now they are treated like broken clay pots,</p>
<p class="poetry">made by a potter. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ג</span> (<i>Gimel</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:3</span> Even the jackals nurse their young</p>
<p class="poetry">at their breast, </p>
<p class="poetry">but my people are cruel,</p>
<p class="poetry">like ostriches in the wilderness.</p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ד</span> (<i>Dalet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:4</span> The infant’s tongue sticks </p>
<p class="poetry">to the roof of its mouth due to thirst; </p>
<p class="poetry">little children beg for bread, </p>
<p class="poetry">but no one gives them even a morsel. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ה</span> (<i>He</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:5</span> Those who once feasted on delicacies </p>
<p class="poetry">are now starving to death in the streets.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who grew up wearing expensive clothes </p>
<p class="poetry">are now dying amid garbage. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ו</span> (<i>Vav</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:6</span> The punishment of my people </p>
<p class="poetry">exceeds that of Sodom,</p>
<p class="poetry">which was overthrown in a moment</p>
<p class="poetry">with no one to help her. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ז</span> (<i>Zayin</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> Our consecrated ones were brighter than snow,</p>
<p class="poetry">whiter than milk;</p>
<p class="poetry">their bodies more ruddy than corals,</p>
<p class="poetry">their hair like lapis lazuli. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ח</span> (<i>Khet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> Now their appearance is darker than soot;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are not recognized in the streets.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their skin has shriveled on their bones;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is dried up, like tree bark.</p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ט</span> (<i>Tet</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:9</span> Those who die by the sword are better off</p>
<p class="poetry">than those who die of hunger, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who waste away, </p>
<p class="poetry">struck down from lack of food. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">י</span> (<i>Yod</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:10</span> The hands of tenderhearted women </p>
<p class="poetry">cooked their own children,</p>
<p class="poetry">who became their food, </p>
<p class="poetry">when my people were destroyed. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">כ</span> (<i>Kaf</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> fully vented his wrath;</p>
<p class="poetry">he poured out his fierce anger. </p>
<p class="poetry">He started a fire in Zion;</p>
<p class="poetry">it consumed her foundations. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ל</span> (<i>Lamed</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> Neither the kings of the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">nor the people of the lands ever thought </p>
<p class="poetry">that enemy or foe could enter</p>
<p class="poetry">the gates of Jerusalem.</p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">מ</span> (<i>Mem</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:13</span> But it happened due to the sins of her prophets </p>
<p class="poetry">and the iniquities of her priests,</p>
<p class="poetry">who poured out in her midst</p>
<p class="poetry">the blood of the righteous. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">נ</span> (<i>Nun</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:14</span> They wander blindly through the streets,</p>
<p class="poetry">defiled by the blood they shed, </p>
<p class="poetry">while no one dares </p>
<p class="poetry">to touch their garments. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ס</span> (<i>Samek</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:15</span> People cry to them, “Turn away! You are unclean! </p>
<p class="poetry">Turn away! Turn away! Don’t touch us!”</p>
<p class="poetry">So they have fled and wander about;</p>
<p class="poetry">but the nations say, “They may not stay here any longer.” </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">פ</span> (<i>Pe</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:16</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> himself has scattered them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he no longer watches over them.</p>
<p class="poetry">They did not honor the priests; </p>
<p class="poetry">they did not show favor to the elders. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ע</span> (<i>Ayin</i>)</p><p class="paragraphtitle">The People of Jerusalem Lament</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:17</span> Our eyes continually failed us</p>
<p class="poetry">as we looked in vain for help. </p>
<p class="poetry">From our watchtowers we watched </p>
<p class="poetry">for a nation that could not rescue us. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">צ</span> (<i>Tsade</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:18</span> Our enemies hunted us down at every step </p>
<p class="poetry">so that we could not walk about in our streets.</p>
<p class="poetry">Our end drew near, our days were numbered, </p>
<p class="poetry">for our end had come! </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ק</span> (<i>Qof</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:19</span> Those who pursued us were swifter</p>
<p class="poetry">than eagles in the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry">They chased us over the mountains;</p>
<p class="poetry">they ambushed us in the wilderness. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ר</span> (<i>Resh</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:20</span> Our very life breath—the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s anointed king —</p>
<p class="poetry">was caught in their traps, </p>
<p class="poetry">of whom we thought, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Under his protection we will survive among the nations.” </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ש</span> (<i>Sin/Shin</i>)</p><p class="paragraphtitle">The Prophet Speaks</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:21</span> Rejoice and be glad for now, O people of Edom, </p>
<p class="poetry">who reside in the land of Uz.</p>
<p class="poetry">But the cup of judgment will pass to you also;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will get drunk and take off your clothes. </p>
<p class="lamhebrew"><span class="hebrew">ת</span> (<i>Tav</i>)</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">4:22</span> O people of Zion, your punishment will come to an end; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will not prolong your exile.</p>
<p class="poetry">But, O people of Edom, he will punish your sin </p>
<p class="poetry">and reveal your offenses! </p>

</body>
</html>