<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Satan’s Additional Charge</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Again the day came when the sons of God came to present themselves before the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span>, and Satan also arrived among them to present himself before the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span>. <span class="verse">2:2</span> And the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span> said to Satan, “Where have you come from?” Satan answered the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span>, “From roving about on the earth, and from walking back and forth across it.” <span class="verse">2:3</span> Then the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span> said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant Job? For there is no one like him on the earth, a pure and upright man, one who fears God and turns away from evil. And he still holds firmly to his integrity, so that you stirred me up to destroy him without reason.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> But Satan answered the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span>, “Skin for skin! Indeed, a man will give up all that he has to save his life. <span class="verse">2:5</span> But extend your hand and strike his bone and his flesh, and he will no doubt curse you to your face!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:6</span> So the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span> said to Satan, “All right, he is in your power; only preserve his life.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Integrity in Suffering</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:7</span> So Satan went out from the presence of the<span class="smcaps"> Lord</span>, and he afflicted Job with a malignant ulcer from the soles of his feet to the top of his head. <span class="verse">2:8</span> Job took a shard of broken pottery to scrape himself with while he was sitting among the ashes. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Then his wife said to him, “Are you still holding firmly to your integrity? Curse God, and die!” <span class="verse">2:10</span> But he replied, “You’re talking like one of the godless women would do! Should we receive what is good from God, and not also receive what is evil?” In all this Job did not sin by what he said. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Visit of Job’s Friends </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> When Job’s three friends heard about all this calamity that had happened to him, each of them came from his own country —Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. They met together to come to show sympathy for him and to console him. <span class="verse">2:12</span> But when they gazed intently from a distance but did not recognize him, they began to weep loudly. Each of them tore his robes, and they threw dust into the air over their heads. <span class="verse">2:13</span> Then they sat down with him on the ground for seven days and seven nights, yet no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great. </p>

</body>
</html>