<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 18</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 18</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David Conquers the Neighboring Nations</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:1</span> Later David defeated the Philistines and subdued them. He took Gath and its surrounding towns away from the Philistines. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:2</span> He defeated the Moabites; the Moabites became David’s subjects and brought tribute. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:3</span> David defeated King Hadadezer of Zobah as far as Hamath, when he went to extend his authority to the Euphrates River. <span class="verse">18:4</span> David seized from him 1,000 chariots, 7,000 charioteers, and 20,000 infantrymen . David cut the hamstrings of all but 100 of Hadadezer’s chariot horses. <span class="verse">18:5</span> The Arameans of Damascus came to help King Hadadezer of Zobah, but David killed 22,000 of the Arameans. <span class="verse">18:6</span> David placed garrisons in the territory of the Arameans of Damascus; the Arameans became David’s subjects and brought tribute. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protected David wherever he campaigned. <span class="verse">18:7</span> David took the golden shields which Hadadezer’s servants had carried and brought them to Jerusalem. <span class="verse">18:8</span> From Tibhath and Kun, Hadadezer’s cities, David took a great deal of bronze. (Solomon used it to make the big bronze basin called “The Sea,” the pillars, and other bronze items.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:9</span> When King Tou of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of King Hadadezer of Zobah, <span class="verse">18:10</span> he sent his son Hadoram to King David to extend his best wishes and to pronounce a blessing on him for his victory over Hadadezer, for Tou had been at war with Hadadezer. He also sent various items made of gold, silver, and bronze. <span class="verse">18:11</span> King David dedicated these things to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, along with the silver and gold which he had carried off from all the nations, including Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:12</span> Abishai son of Zeruiah killed 18,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt. <span class="verse">18:13</span> He placed garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> protected David wherever he campaigned. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David’s Officials</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:14</span> David reigned over all Israel; he guaranteed justice for all his people. <span class="verse">18:15</span> Joab son of Zeruiah was commanding general of the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was secretary; <span class="verse">18:16</span> Zadok son of Ahitub and Abimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Shavsha was scribe; <span class="verse">18:17</span> Benaiah son of Jehoiada supervised the Kerethites and Pelethites; and David’s sons were the king’s leading officials. </p>

</body>
</html>