<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Habakkuk 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Habakkuk<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Habakkuk Complains to the Lord</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> This is the oracle that the prophet Habakkuk saw:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> How long, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, must I cry for help? </p>
<p class="poetry">But you do not listen!</p>
<p class="poetry">I call out to you, “Violence!” </p>
<p class="poetry">But you do not deliver! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> Why do you force me to witness injustice? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you put up with wrongdoing? </p>
<p class="poetry">Destruction and violence confront me;</p>
<p class="poetry">conflict is present and one must endure strife. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> For this reason the law lacks power, </p>
<p class="poetry">and justice is never carried out. </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, the wicked intimidate the innocent. </p>
<p class="poetry">For this reason justice is perverted. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Surprising Answer</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> “Look at the nations and pay attention! </p>
<p class="poetry">You will be shocked and amazed! </p>
<p class="poetry">For I will do something in your lifetime </p>
<p class="poetry">that you will not believe even though you are forewarned. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> Look, I am about to empower the Babylonians,</p>
<p class="poetry">that ruthless and greedy nation.</p>
<p class="poetry">They sweep across the surface of the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">seizing dwelling places that do not belong to them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> They are frightening and terrifying;</p>
<p class="poetry">they decide for themselves what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> Their horses are faster than leopards</p>
<p class="poetry">and more alert than wolves in the desert. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their horses gallop, </p>
<p class="poetry">their horses come a great distance;</p>
<p class="poetry">like vultures they swoop down quickly to devour their prey. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> All of them intend to do violence;</p>
<p class="poetry">every face is determined. </p>
<p class="poetry">They take prisoners as easily as one scoops up sand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> They mock kings</p>
<p class="poetry">and laugh at rulers.</p>
<p class="poetry">They laugh at every fortified city;</p>
<p class="poetry">they build siege ramps and capture them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> They sweep by like the wind and pass on. </p>
<p class="poetry">But the one who considers himself a god will be held guilty.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Habakkuk Voices Some Concerns</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you have been active from ancient times; </p>
<p class="poetry">my sovereign God, you are immortal. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you have made them your instrument of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">Protector, you have appointed them as your instrument of punishment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> You are too just to tolerate evil;</p>
<p class="poetry">you are unable to condone wrongdoing.</p>
<p class="poetry">So why do you put up with such treacherous people? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you say nothing when the wicked devour those more righteous than they are? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> You made people like fish in the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">like animals in the sea that have no ruler. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> The Babylonian tyrant pulls them all up with a fishhook;</p>
<p class="poetry">he hauls them in with his throw net. </p>
<p class="poetry">When he catches them in his dragnet,</p>
<p class="poetry">he is very happy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> Because of his success he offers sacrifices to his throw net</p>
<p class="poetry">and burns incense to his dragnet; </p>
<p class="poetry">for because of them he has plenty of food, </p>
<p class="poetry">and more than enough to eat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> Will he then continue to fill and empty his throw net? </p>
<p class="poetry">Will he always destroy nations and spare none? </p>

</body>
</html>