<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Leader’s Offerings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span>  When Moses had completed setting up the tabernacle, he anointed it and consecrated it and all its furnishings, and he anointed and consecrated the altar and all its utensils. <span class="verse">7:2</span> Then the leaders of Israel, the heads of their clans, made an offering. They were the leaders of the tribes; they were the ones who had been supervising the numbering. <span class="verse">7:3</span> They brought their offerings before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, six covered carts and twelve oxen—one cart for every two of the leaders, and an ox for each one; and they presented them in front of the tabernacle. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Distribution of the Gifts</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:4</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">7:5</span> “Receive these gifts from them, that they may be used in doing the work of the tent of meeting; and you must give them to the Levites, to every man as his service requires.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:6</span> So Moses accepted the carts and the oxen and gave them to the Levites. <span class="verse">7:7</span> He gave two carts and four oxen to the Gershonites, as their service required; <span class="verse">7:8</span> and he gave four carts and eight oxen to the Merarites, as their service required, under the authority of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest. <span class="verse">7:9</span> But to the Kohathites he gave none, because the service of the holy things, which they carried on their shoulders, was their responsibility. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Time of Presentation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:10</span> The leaders offered gifts for the dedication of the altar when it was anointed. And the leaders presented their offering before the altar. <span class="verse">7:11</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, “They must present their offering, one leader for each day, for the dedication of the altar.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Tribal Offerings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:12</span> The one who presented his offering on the first day was Nahshon son of Amminadab, from the tribe of Judah. <span class="verse">7:13</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels, and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:14</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:15</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:16</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:17</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nahshon son of Amminadab. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:18</span> On the second day Nethanel son of Zuar, leader of Issachar, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:19</span> He offered for his offering one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:20</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:21</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:22</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:23</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nethanel son of Zuar. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:24</span> On the third day Eliab son of Helon, leader of the Zebulunites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:25</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:26</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:27</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:28</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:29</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliab son of Helon. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:30</span> On the fourth day Elizur son of Shedeur, leader of the Reubenites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:31</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:32</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:33</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:34</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:35</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elizur son of Shedeur. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:36</span> On the fifth day Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai, leader of the Simeonites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:37</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:38</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:39</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:40</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:41</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:42</span> On the sixth day Eliasaph son of Deuel, leader of the Gadites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:43</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:44</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:45</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:46</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:47</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliasaph son of Deuel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:48</span> On the seventh day Elishama son of Ammihud, leader of the Ephraimites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:49</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:50</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:51</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:52</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:53</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elishama son of Ammihud. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:54</span> On the eighth day Gamaliel son of Pedahzur, leader of the Manassehites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:55</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:56</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:57</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:58</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:59</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Gamaliel son of Pedahzur. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:60</span> On the ninth day Abidan son of Gideoni, leader of the Benjaminites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:61</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:62</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:63</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:64</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:65</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Abidan son of Gideoni. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:66</span> On the tenth day Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai, leader of the Danites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:67</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:68</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:69</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:70</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:71</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:72</span> On the eleventh day Pagiel son of Ocran, leader of the Asherites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:73</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:74</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:75</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:76</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:77</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Pagiel son of Ocran. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:78</span> On the twelfth day Ahira son of Enan, leader of the Naphtalites, presented an offering. <span class="verse">7:79</span> His offering was one silver platter weighing 130 shekels and one silver sprinkling bowl weighing 70 shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel, each of them full of fine flour mixed with olive oil as a grain offering; <span class="verse">7:80</span> one gold pan weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; <span class="verse">7:81</span> one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; <span class="verse">7:82</span> one male goat for a purification offering; <span class="verse">7:83</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two bulls, five rams, five male goats, and five lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahira son of Enan. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Summary</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:84</span> This was the dedication for the altar from the leaders of Israel, when it was anointed: twelve silver platters, twelve silver sprinkling bowls, and twelve gold pans. <span class="verse">7:85</span> Each silver platter weighed 130 shekels, and each silver sprinkling bowl weighed 70 shekels. All the silver of the vessels weighed 2,400 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel. <span class="verse">7:86</span> The twelve gold pans full of incense weighed 10 shekels each, according to the sanctuary shekel; all the gold of the pans weighed 120 shekels. <span class="verse">7:87</span> All the animals for the burnt offering were 12 young bulls, 12 rams, 12 male lambs in their first year, with their grain offering, and 12 male goats for a purification offering. <span class="verse">7:88</span> All the animals for the sacrifice for the peace offering were 24 young bulls, 60 rams, 60 male goats, and 60 lambs in their first year. These were the dedication offerings for the altar after it was anointed. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:89</span> Now when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, he heard the voice speaking to him from above the atonement lid that was on the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim. Thus he spoke to him.</p>

</body>
</html>