<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Building of the Temple</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Solomon began building the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had appeared to his father David. This was the place that David prepared at the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. <span class="verse">3:2</span> He began building on the second day of the second month of the fourth year of his reign. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:3</span> Solomon laid the foundation for God’s temple; its length (determined according to the old standard of measure) was 90 feet, and its width 30 feet. <span class="verse">3:4</span> The porch in front of the main hall was 30 feet long, corresponding to the width of the temple, and its height was 30 feet. He plated the inside with pure gold. <span class="verse">3:5</span> He paneled the main hall with boards made from evergreen trees and plated it with fine gold, decorated with palm trees and chains. <span class="verse">3:6</span> He decorated the temple with precious stones; the gold he used came from Parvaim. <span class="verse">3:7</span> He overlaid the temple’s rafters, thresholds, walls and doors with gold; he carved decorative cherubim on the walls. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:8</span> He made the Most Holy Place; its length was 30 feet, corresponding to the width of the temple, and its width 30 feet. He plated it with 600 talents of fine gold. <span class="verse">3:9</span> The gold nails weighed 50 shekels; he also plated the upper areas with gold. <span class="verse">3:10</span> In the Most Holy Place he made two images of cherubim and plated them with gold. <span class="verse">3:11</span> The combined wing span of the cherubim was 30 feet. One of the first cherub’s wings was 7½ long and touched one wall of the temple; its other wing was also 7½ long and touched one of the second cherub’s wings. <span class="verse">3:12</span> Likewise one of the second cherub’s wings was 7½ long and touched the other wall of the temple; its other wing was also 7½ long and touched one of the first cherub’s wings. <span class="verse">3:13</span> The combined wingspan of these cherubim was 30 feet. They stood upright, facing inward. <span class="verse">3:14</span> He made the curtain out of blue, purple, crimson, and white fabrics, and embroidered on it decorative cherubim. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:15</span> In front of the temple he made two pillars which had a combined length of 52½ feet, with each having a plated capital 7½ high. <span class="verse">3:16</span> He made ornamental chains and put them on top of the pillars. He also made 100 pomegranate-shaped ornaments and arranged them within the chains. <span class="verse">3:17</span> He set up the pillars in front of the temple, one on the right side and the other on the left. He named the one on the right Yakin, and the one on the left Boaz. </p>

</body>
</html>