<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 52</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 52</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:1</span> Wake up! Wake up!</p>
<p class="poetry">Clothe yourself with strength, O Zion!</p>
<p class="poetry">Put on your beautiful clothes,</p>
<p class="poetry">O Jerusalem, holy city.</p>
<p class="poetry">For uncircumcised and unclean pagans</p>
<p class="poetry">will no longer invade you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:2</span> Shake off the dirt! </p>
<p class="poetry">Get up, captive Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry">Take off the iron chains around your neck,</p>
<p class="poetry">O captive daughter Zion. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">52:3</span> For this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“You were sold for nothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you will not be redeemed for money.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">52:4</span> For this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“In the beginning my people went to live temporarily in Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">Assyria oppressed them for no good reason.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:5</span> And now, what do we have here?” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">“Indeed my people have been carried away for nothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who rule over them taunt,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">“and my name is constantly slandered all day long.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:6</span> For this reason my people will know my name;</p>
<p class="poetry">for this reason they will know at that time that I am the one who says,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Here I am.’” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:7</span> How delightful it is to see approaching over the mountains </p>
<p class="poetry">the feet of a messenger who announces peace,</p>
<p class="poetry">a messenger who brings good news, who announces deliverance,</p>
<p class="poetry">who says to Zion, “Your God reigns!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:8</span> Listen, your watchmen shout;</p>
<p class="poetry">in unison they shout for joy,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they see with their very own eyes </p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s return to Zion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:9</span> In unison give a joyful shout,</p>
<p class="poetry">O ruins of Jerusalem!</p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> consoles his people;</p>
<p class="poetry">he protects Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> reveals his royal power </p>
<p class="poetry">in the sight of all the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">the entire earth sees</p>
<p class="poetry">our God deliver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:11</span> Leave! Leave! Get out of there!</p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t touch anything unclean!</p>
<p class="poetry">Get out of it! </p>
<p class="poetry">Stay pure, you who carry the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s holy items. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:12</span> Yet do not depart quickly</p>
<p class="poetry">or leave in a panic. </p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> goes before you;</p>
<p class="poetry">the God of Israel is your rear guard.</p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Vindicate His Servant</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:13</span> Look, my servant will succeed! </p>
<p class="poetry">He will be elevated, lifted high, and greatly exalted —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:14</span> (just as many were horrified by the sight of you) </p>
<p class="poetry">he was so disfigured he no longer looked like a man; </p>
<p class="poetry">his form was so marred he no longer looked human —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:15</span> so now he will startle many nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Kings will be shocked by his exaltation, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they will witness something unannounced to them,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they will understand something they had not heard about.</p>

</body>
</html>