<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Kings 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Kings<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span>  At that time Jeroboam’s son Abijah became sick. <span class="verse">14:2</span> Jeroboam told his wife, “Disguise yourself so that people cannot recognize you are Jeroboam’s wife. Then go to Shiloh; Ahijah the prophet, who told me I would rule over this nation, lives there. <span class="verse">14:3</span> Take ten loaves of bread, some small cakes, and a container of honey and visit him. He will tell you what will happen to the boy.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:4</span> Jeroboam’s wife did as she was told. She went to Shiloh and visited Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see; he had lost his eyesight in his old age. <span class="verse">14:5</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had told Ahijah, “Look, Jeroboam’s wife is coming to find out from you what will happen to her son, for he is sick. Tell her such and such. When she comes, she will be in a disguise.” <span class="verse">14:6</span> When Ahijah heard the sound of her footsteps as she came through the door, he said, “Come on in, wife of Jeroboam! Why are you pretending to be someone else? I have been commissioned to give you bad news. <span class="verse">14:7</span> Go, tell Jeroboam, ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel has said: “I raised you up from among the people and made you ruler over my people Israel. <span class="verse">14:8</span> I tore the kingdom away from the Davidic dynasty and gave it to you. But you are not like my servant David, who kept my commandments and followed me wholeheartedly by doing only what I approve. <span class="verse">14:9</span> You have sinned more than all who came before you. You went and angered me by making other gods, formed out of metal; you have completely disregarded me. <span class="verse">14:10</span> So I am ready to bring disaster on the dynasty of Jeroboam. I will cut off every last male belonging to Jeroboam in Israel, including even the weak and incapacitated. I will burn up the dynasty of Jeroboam, just as one burns manure until it is completely consumed. <span class="verse">14:11</span> Dogs will eat the members of your family who die in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat the ones who die in the country.”’ Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has announced it!</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:12</span> “As for you, get up and go home. When you set foot in the city, the boy will die. <span class="verse">14:13</span> All Israel will mourn him and bury him. He is the only one in Jeroboam’s family who will receive a decent burial, for he is the only one in whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel found anything good. <span class="verse">14:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will raise up a king over Israel who will cut off Jeroboam’s dynasty. It is ready to happen! <span class="verse">14:15</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will attack Israel, making it like a reed that sways in the water. He will remove Israel from this good land he gave to their ancestors and scatter them beyond the Euphrates River, because they angered the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> by making Asherah poles. <span class="verse">14:16</span> He will hand Israel over to their enemies because of the sins which Jeroboam committed and which he made Israel commit.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:17</span> So Jeroboam’s wife got up and went back to Tirzah. As she crossed the threshold of the house, the boy died. <span class="verse">14:18</span> All Israel buried him and mourned for him, in keeping with the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message that he had spoken through his servant, the prophet Ahijah. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jeroboam’s Reign Ends</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:19</span> The rest of the events of Jeroboam’s reign, including the details of his battles and rule, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Israel. <span class="verse">14:20</span> Jeroboam ruled for twenty-two years; then he passed away. His son Nadab replaced him as king. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rehoboam’s Reign over Judah </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:21</span> Now Rehoboam son of Solomon ruled in Judah. He was forty-one years old when he became king and he ruled for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> chose from all the tribes of Israel to be his home. His mother was an Ammonite woman named Naamah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:22</span> Judah did evil in the sight of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. They made him more jealous by their sins than their ancestors had done. <span class="verse">14:23</span> They even built for themselves high places, sacred pillars, and Asherah poles on every high hill and under every green tree. <span class="verse">14:24</span> There were also male cultic prostitutes in the land. They committed the same horrible sins as the nations that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had driven out from before the Israelites. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:25</span> In King Rehoboam’s fifth year, King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem. <span class="verse">14:26</span> He took away the treasures of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and of the royal palace; he took everything, including all the golden shields that Solomon had made. <span class="verse">14:27</span> King Rehoboam made bronze shields to replace them and assigned them to the officers of the royal guard who protected the entrance to the royal palace. <span class="verse">14:28</span> Whenever the king visited the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple, the royal guard carried them and then brought them back to the guardroom. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:29</span> The rest of the events of Rehoboam’s reign, including his accomplishments, are recorded in the scroll called the Annals of the Kings of Judah. <span class="verse">14:30</span> Rehoboam and Jeroboam were continually at war with each other. <span class="verse">14:31</span> Rehoboam passed away and was buried with his ancestors in the City of David. His mother was an Ammonite named Naamah. His son Abijah replaced him as king. </p>

</body>
</html>