<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) James 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>James<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Power of the Tongue</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers and sisters, because you know that we will be judged more strictly. <span class="verse">3:2</span> For we all stumble in many ways. If someone does not stumble in what he says, he is a perfect individual, able to control the entire body as well. <span class="verse">3:3</span> And if we put bits into the mouths of horses to get them to obey us, then we guide their entire bodies. <span class="verse">3:4</span> Look at ships too: Though they are so large and driven by harsh winds, they are steered by a tiny rudder wherever the pilot’s inclination directs. <span class="verse">3:5</span> So too the tongue is a small part of the body, yet it has great pretensions. Think how small a flame sets a huge forest ablaze. <span class="verse">3:6</span> And the tongue is a fire! The tongue represents the world of wrongdoing among the parts of our bodies. It pollutes the entire body and sets fire to the course of human existence—and is set on fire by hell. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:7</span> For every kind of animal, bird, reptile, and sea creature is subdued and has been subdued by humankind. <span class="verse">3:8</span> But no human being can subdue the tongue; it is a restless evil, full of deadly poison. <span class="verse">3:9</span> With it we bless the Lord and Father, and with it we curse people made in God’s image. <span class="verse">3:10</span> From the same mouth come blessing and cursing. These things should not be so, my brothers and sisters. <span class="verse">3:11</span> A spring does not pour out fresh water and bitter water from the same opening, does it? <span class="verse">3:12</span> Can a fig tree produce olives, my brothers and sisters, or a vine produce figs? Neither can a salt water spring produce fresh water. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">True Wisdom</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:13</span> Who is wise and understanding among you? By his good conduct he should show his works done in the gentleness that wisdom brings. <span class="verse">3:14</span> But if you have bitter jealousy and selfishness in your hearts, do not boast and tell lies against the truth. <span class="verse">3:15</span> Such wisdom does not come from above but is earthly, natural, demonic. <span class="verse">3:16</span> For where there is jealousy and selfishness, there is disorder and every evil practice. <span class="verse">3:17</span> But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, accommodating, full of mercy and good fruit, impartial, and not hypocritical. <span class="verse">3:18</span> And the fruit that consists of righteousness is planted in peace among those who make peace. </p>

</body>
</html>