<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Reuben’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> The sons of Reuben, Israel’s firstborn—</p>
<p class="bodytext">(Now he was the firstborn, but when he defiled his father’s bed, his rights as firstborn were given to the sons of Joseph, Israel’s son. So Reuben is not listed as firstborn in the genealogical records. <span class="verse">5:2</span> Though Judah was the strongest among his brothers and a leader descended from him, the right of the firstborn belonged to Joseph.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:3</span> The sons of Reuben, Israel’s firstborn: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:4</span> The descendants of Joel: his son Shemaiah, his son Gog, his son Shimei, <span class="verse">5:5</span> his son Micah, his son Reaiah, his son Baal, <span class="verse">5:6</span> and his son Beerah, whom King Tiglath-Pileser of Assyria carried into exile. Beerah was the tribal leader of Reuben. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:7</span> His brothers by their clans, as listed in their genealogical records:</p>
<p class="bodytext">The leader Jeiel, Zechariah, <span class="verse">5:8</span> and Bela son of Azaz, son of Shema, son of Joel. </p>
<p class="bodytext">They lived in Aroer as far as Nebo and Baal Meon. <span class="verse">5:9</span> In the east they settled as far as the entrance to the wilderness that stretches to the Euphrates River, for their cattle had increased in numbers in the land of Gilead. <span class="verse">5:10</span> During the time of Saul they attacked the Hagrites and defeated them. They took over their territory in the entire eastern region of Gilead. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Gad’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:11</span> The descendants of Gad lived near them in the land of Bashan, as far as Salecah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:12</span> They included Joel the leader, Shapham the second in command, Janai, and Shaphat in Bashan. <span class="verse">5:13</span> Their relatives, listed according to their families, included Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber—seven in all. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:14</span> These were the sons of Abihail son of Huri, son of Jaroah, son of Gilead, son of Michael, son of Jeshishai, son of Jahdo, son of Buz. <span class="verse">5:15</span> Ahi son of Abdiel, son of Guni, was the leader of the family. <span class="verse">5:16</span> They lived in Gilead, in Bashan and its surrounding settlements, and in the pasturelands of Sharon to their very borders. <span class="verse">5:17</span> All of them were listed in the genealogical records in the time of King Jotham of Judah and in the time of King Jeroboam of Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:18</span> The Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh had 44,760 men in their combined armies, warriors who carried shields and swords, were equipped with bows, and were trained for war. <span class="verse">5:19</span> They attacked the Hagrites, Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab. <span class="verse">5:20</span> They received divine help in fighting them, and the Hagrites and all their allies were handed over to them. They cried out to God during the battle; he responded to their prayers because they trusted in him. <span class="verse">5:21</span> They seized the Hagrites’ animals, including 50,000 camels, 250,000 sheep, and 2,000 donkeys. They also took captive 100,000 people. <span class="verse">5:22</span> Because God fought for them, they killed many of the enemy. They dispossessed the Hagrites and lived in their land until the exile. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Half-Tribe of Manasseh</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:23</span> The half-tribe of Manasseh settled in the land from Bashan as far as Baal Hermon, Senir, and Mount Hermon. They grew in number. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:24</span> These were the leaders of their families: </p>
<p class="bodytext">Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel. They were skilled warriors, men of reputation, and leaders of their families. <span class="verse">5:25</span> But they were unfaithful to the God of their ancestors and worshiped instead the gods of the native peoples whom God had destroyed before them. <span class="verse">5:26</span> So the God of Israel stirred up King Pul of Assyria (that is, King Tiglath-Pileser of Assyria), and he carried away the Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh and took them to Halah, Habor, Hara, and the river of Gozan, where they remain to this very day. </p>

</body>
</html>