<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 38</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 38</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Hears Hezekiah’s Prayer</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:1</span> In those days Hezekiah was stricken with a terminal illness. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz visited him and told him, “This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, ‘Give instructions to your household, for you are about to die; you will not get well.’” <span class="verse">38:2</span> Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, <span class="verse">38:3</span> “Please, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Remember how I have served you faithfully and with wholehearted devotion, and how I have carried out your will.” Then Hezekiah wept bitterly. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to Isaiah, <span class="verse">38:5</span> “Go and tell Hezekiah: ‘This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of your ancestor David says: “I have heard your prayer; I have seen your tears. Look, I will add fifteen years to your life. <span class="verse">38:6</span> I will also rescue you and this city from the king of Assyria. I will shield this city.”’” <span class="verse">38:7</span> Isaiah replied, “This is your sign from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> confirming that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will do what he has said: <span class="verse">38:8</span> Look, I will make the shadow go back ten steps on the stairs of Ahaz.” And then the shadow went back ten steps. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Hezekiah’s Song of Thanks</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">38:9</span> This is the prayer of King Hezekiah of Judah when he was sick and then recovered from his illness: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:10</span> “I thought, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘In the middle of my life I must walk through the gates of Sheol,</p>
<p class="poetry">I am deprived of the rest of my years.’ </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">38:11</span> “I thought,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘I will no longer see the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in the land of the living,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will no longer look on humankind with the inhabitants of the world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:12</span> My dwelling place is removed and taken away from me</p>
<p class="poetry">as a shepherd’s tent.</p>
<p class="poetry">I rolled up my life like a weaver rolls cloth; </p>
<p class="poetry">from the loom he cuts me off. </p>
<p class="poetry">You turn day into night and end my  life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:13</span> I cry out until morning;</p>
<p class="poetry">like a lion he shatters all my bones;</p>
<p class="poetry">you turn day into night and end my life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:14</span> Like a swallow or a thrush I chirp,</p>
<p class="poetry">I coo like a dove;</p>
<p class="poetry">my eyes grow tired from looking up to the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry">O Lord, I am oppressed; </p>
<p class="poetry">help me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:15</span> What can I say?</p>
<p class="poetry">He has decreed and acted. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will walk slowly all my years because I am overcome with grief. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:16</span> O Lord, your decrees can give men life;</p>
<p class="poetry">may years of life be restored to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Restore my health and preserve my life.’ </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">38:17</span> “Look, the grief I experienced was for my benefit. </p>
<p class="poetry">You delivered me from the Pit of oblivion. </p>
<p class="poetry">For you removed all my sins from your sight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:18</span> Indeed Sheol does not give you thanks;</p>
<p class="poetry">death does not praise you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who descend into the Pit do not anticipate your faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:19</span> The living person, the living person, he gives you thanks,</p>
<p class="poetry">as I do today.</p>
<p class="poetry">A father tells his sons about your faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">38:20</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is about to deliver me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and we will celebrate with music </p>
<p class="poetry">for the rest of our lives in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">38:21</span>  (Isaiah ordered, “Let them take a fig cake and apply it to the ulcerated sore and he will get well.” <span class="verse">38:22</span> Hezekiah said, “What is the confirming sign that I will go up to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple?”) </p>

</body>
</html>