<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Samuel 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Samuel<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Call of Samuel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Now the boy Samuel continued serving the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> under Eli’s supervision. Receiving a message from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was rare in those days; revelatory visions were infrequent. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:2</span> Eli’s eyes had begun to fail, so that he was unable to see well. At that time he was lying down in his place, <span class="verse">3:3</span> and the lamp of God had not yet been extinguished. Samuel was lying down in the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> as well; the ark of God was also there. <span class="verse">3:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> called to Samuel, and he replied, “Here I am!” <span class="verse">3:5</span> Then he ran to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But Eli said, “I didn’t call you. Go back and lie down.” So he went back and lay down. <span class="verse">3:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> again called, “Samuel!” So Samuel got up and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But Eli said, “I didn’t call you, my son. Go back and lie down.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Now Samuel did not yet know the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s messages had not yet been revealed to him. <span class="verse">3:8</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> called Samuel a third time. So he got up and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me!” Eli then realized that it was the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who was calling the boy. <span class="verse">3:9</span> So Eli said to Samuel, “Go back and lie down. When he calls you, say, ‘Speak, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for your servant is listening.’ So Samuel went back and lay down in his place. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:10</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> came and stood nearby, calling as he had previously done, “Samuel! Samuel!” Samuel replied, “Speak, for your servant is listening!” <span class="verse">3:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Samuel, “Look! I am about to do something in Israel; when anyone hears about it, both of his ears will tingle. <span class="verse">3:12</span> On that day I will carry out against Eli everything that I spoke about his house—from start to finish! <span class="verse">3:13</span> You should tell him that I am about to judge his house forever because of the sin that he knew about. For his sons were cursing God, and he did not rebuke them. <span class="verse">3:14</span> Therefore I swore an oath to the house of Eli, ‘The sin of the house of Eli can never be forgiven by sacrifice or by grain offering.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:15</span> So Samuel lay down until morning. Then he opened the doors of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s house. But Samuel was afraid to tell Eli about the vision. <span class="verse">3:16</span> However, Eli called Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son!” He replied, “Here I am.” <span class="verse">3:17</span> Eli said, “What message did he speak to you? Don’t conceal it from me. God will judge you severely if you conceal from me anything that he said to you!”</p>

</body>
</html>