<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Micah 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Micah<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Will Judge Judah’s Sinful Leaders</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> I said,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Listen, you leaders of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">you rulers of the nation of Israel!</p>
<p class="poetry">You ought to know what is just, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> yet you hate what is good </p>
<p class="poetry">and love what is evil. </p>
<p class="poetry">You flay my people’s skin </p>
<p class="poetry">and rip the flesh from their bones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> You devour my people’s flesh,</p>
<p class="poetry">strip off their skin,</p>
<p class="poetry">and crush their bones.</p>
<p class="poetry">You chop them up like flesh in a pot —</p>
<p class="poetry">like meat in a kettle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> Someday these sinful leaders will cry to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for help,</p>
<p class="poetry">but he will not answer them.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will hide his face from them at that time,</p>
<p class="poetry">because they have done such wicked deeds.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:5</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has said about the prophets who mislead my people, </p>
<p class="poetry">“If someone gives them enough to eat,</p>
<p class="poetry">they offer an oracle of peace. </p>
<p class="poetry">But if someone does not give them food,</p>
<p class="poetry">they are ready to declare war on him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> Therefore night will fall, and you will receive no visions; </p>
<p class="poetry">it will grow dark, and you will no longer be able to read the omens. </p>
<p class="poetry">The sun will set on these prophets,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the daylight will turn to darkness over their heads. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> The prophets will be ashamed;</p>
<p class="poetry">the omen readers will be humiliated.</p>
<p class="poetry">All of them will cover their mouths, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they will receive no divine oracles.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">3:8</span> But I am full of the courage that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s Spirit gives</p>
<p class="poetry">and have a strong commitment to justice. </p>
<p class="poetry">This enables me to confront Jacob with its rebellion</p>
<p class="poetry">and Israel with its sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Listen to this, you leaders of the family of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">you rulers of the nation of Israel!</p>
<p class="poetry">You hate justice</p>
<p class="poetry">and pervert all that is right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> You build Zion through bloody crimes, </p>
<p class="poetry">Jerusalem through unjust violence.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> Her leaders take bribes when they decide legal cases, </p>
<p class="poetry">her priests proclaim rulings for profit,</p>
<p class="poetry">and her prophets read omens for pay.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yet they claim to trust the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and say,</p>
<p class="poetry">“The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is among us. </p>
<p class="poetry">Disaster will not overtake us!”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Therefore, because of you, Zion will be plowed up like a field,</p>
<p class="poetry">Jerusalem will become a heap of ruins,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the Temple Mount will become a hill overgrown with brush! </p>

</body>
</html>