<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Noah, “Come into the ark, you and all your household, for I consider you godly among this generation. <span class="verse">7:2</span> You must take with you seven pairs of every kind of clean animal, the male and its mate, two of every kind of unclean animal, the male and its mate, <span class="verse">7:3</span> and also seven pairs of every kind of bird in the sky, male and female, to preserve their offspring on the face of the entire earth. <span class="verse">7:4</span> For in seven days I will cause it to rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights, and I will wipe from the face of the ground every living thing that I have made.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:5</span> And Noah did all that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:6</span> Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters engulfed the earth. <span class="verse">7:7</span> Noah entered the ark along with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives because of the floodwaters. <span class="verse">7:8</span> Pairs of clean animals, of unclean animals, of birds, and of everything that creeps along the ground, <span class="verse">7:9</span> male and female, came into the ark to Noah, just as God had commanded him. <span class="verse">7:10</span> And after seven days the floodwaters engulfed the earth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:11</span> In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month—on that day all the fountains of the great deep burst open and the floodgates of the heavens were opened. <span class="verse">7:12</span> And the rain fell on the earth forty days and forty nights. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:13</span> On that very day Noah entered the ark, accompanied by his sons Shem, Ham, and Japheth, along with his wife and his sons’ three wives. <span class="verse">7:14</span> They entered, along with every living creature after its kind, every animal after its kind, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth after its kind, and every bird after its kind, everything with wings. <span class="verse">7:15</span> Pairs of all creatures that have the breath of life came into the ark to Noah. <span class="verse">7:16</span> Those that entered were male and female, just as God commanded him. Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> shut him in.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:17</span> The flood engulfed the earth for forty days. As the waters increased, they lifted the ark and raised it above the earth. <span class="verse">7:18</span> The waters completely overwhelmed the earth, and the ark floated on the surface of the waters. <span class="verse">7:19</span> The waters completely inundated the earth so that even all the high mountains under the entire sky were covered. <span class="verse">7:20</span> The waters rose more than 20 feet above the mountains. <span class="verse">7:21</span> And all living things that moved on the earth died, including the birds, domestic animals, wild animals, all the creatures that swarm over the earth, and all humankind. <span class="verse">7:22</span> Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died. <span class="verse">7:23</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> destroyed every living thing that was on the surface of the ground, including people, animals, creatures that creep along the ground, and birds of the sky. They were wiped off the earth. Only Noah and those who were with him in the ark survived. <span class="verse">7:24</span> The waters prevailed over the earth for 150 days. </p>

</body>
</html>