<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 27</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jotham’s Reign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:1</span> Jotham was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok. <span class="verse">27:2</span> He did what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> approved, just as his father Uzziah had done. (He did not, however, have the audacity to enter the temple.) Yet the people were still sinning. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:3</span> He built the Upper Gate to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple and did a lot of work on the wall in the area known as Ophel. <span class="verse">27:4</span> He built cities in the hill country of Judah and fortresses and towers in the forests. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:5</span> He launched a military campaign against the king of the Ammonites and defeated them. That year the Ammonites paid him 100 talents of silver, 10,000 cors of wheat, and 10,000 cors of barley. The Ammonites also paid this same amount of annual tribute the next two years. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:6</span> Jotham grew powerful because he was determined to please the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God. <span class="verse">27:7</span> The rest of the events of Jotham’s reign, including all his military campaigns and his accomplishments, are recorded in the Scroll of the Kings of Israel and Judah. <span class="verse">27:8</span> He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">27:9</span> Jotham passed away and was buried in the City of David. His son Ahaz replaced him as king. </p>

</body>
</html>