<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 33</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 33</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction to the Blessing of Moses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:1</span> This is the blessing Moses the man of God pronounced upon the Israelites before his death. <span class="verse">33:2</span> He said:</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Historical Review</p><p class="poetry">“The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> came from Sinai</p>
<p class="poetry">and revealed himself to Israel from Seir.</p>
<p class="poetry">He appeared in splendor from Mount Paran,</p>
<p class="poetry">and came forth with ten thousand holy ones. </p>
<p class="poetry">With his right hand he gave a fiery law to them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:3</span> Surely he loves the people; </p>
<p class="poetry">all your holy ones are in your power. </p>
<p class="poetry">And they sit at your feet,</p>
<p class="poetry">each receiving your words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:4</span> Moses delivered to us a law, </p>
<p class="poetry">an inheritance for the assembly of Jacob. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was king over Jeshurun, </p>
<p class="poetry">when the leaders of the people assembled,</p>
<p class="poetry">the tribes of Israel together. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Reuben</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:6</span> “May Reuben live and not die,</p>
<p class="poetry">and may his people multiply.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Judah</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:7</span> And this is the blessing to Judah. He said,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Listen, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, to Judah’s voice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and bring him to his people.</p>
<p class="poetry">May his power be great,</p>
<p class="poetry">and may you help him against his foes.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Levi</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:8</span> Of Levi he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Your Thummim and Urim belong to your godly one, </p>
<p class="poetry">whose authority you challenged at Massah, </p>
<p class="poetry">and with whom you argued at the waters of Meribah. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:9</span> He said to his father and mother, ‘I have not seen him,’ </p>
<p class="poetry">and he did not acknowledge his own brothers</p>
<p class="poetry">or know his own children,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they kept your word,</p>
<p class="poetry">and guarded your covenant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:10</span> They will teach Jacob your ordinances</p>
<p class="poetry">and Israel your law;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will offer incense as a pleasant odor, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a whole offering on your altar. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:11</span> Bless, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, his goods,</p>
<p class="poetry">and be pleased with his efforts;</p>
<p class="poetry">undercut the legs of any who attack him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and of those who hate him, so that they cannot stand.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Benjamin</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:12</span> Of Benjamin he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“The beloved of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will live safely by him;</p>
<p class="poetry">he protects him all the time, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> places him on his chest.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Joseph</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:13</span> Of Joseph he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> bless his land</p>
<p class="poetry">with the harvest produced by the sky, by the dew,</p>
<p class="poetry">and by the depths crouching beneath; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:14</span> with the  harvest produced by the daylight </p>
<p class="poetry">and by the moonlight; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:15</span> with the best of the ancient mountains</p>
<p class="poetry">and the harvest produced by the age-old hills; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:16</span> with the harvest of the earth and its fullness</p>
<p class="poetry">and the pleasure of him who resided in the burning bush. </p>
<p class="poetry">May blessing rest on Joseph’s head,</p>
<p class="poetry">and on the top of the head of the one set apart from his brothers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:17</span> May the firstborn of his bull bring him honor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and may his horns be those of a wild ox;</p>
<p class="poetry">with them may he gore all peoples,</p>
<p class="poetry">all the far reaches of the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">They are the ten thousands of Ephraim, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they are the thousands of Manasseh.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Zebulun and Issachar</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:18</span> Of Zebulun he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Rejoice, Zebulun, when you go outside, </p>
<p class="poetry">and Issachar, when you are in your tents. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:19</span> They will summon peoples to the mountain,</p>
<p class="poetry">there they will sacrifice proper sacrifices;</p>
<p class="poetry">for they will enjoy the abundance of the seas,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the hidden treasures of the shores.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Gad</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:20</span> Of Gad he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Blessed be the one who enlarges Gad.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a lioness he will dwell;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will tear at an arm—indeed, a scalp. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:21</span> He has selected the best part for himself,</p>
<p class="poetry">for the portion of the ruler is set aside there;</p>
<p class="poetry">he came with the leaders of the people,</p>
<p class="poetry">he obeyed the righteous laws of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">and his ordinances with Israel.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Dan</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:22</span> Of Dan he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Dan is a lion’s cub;</p>
<p class="poetry">he will leap forth from Bashan.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Naphtali</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:23</span> Of Naphtali he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“O Naphtali, overflowing with favor,</p>
<p class="poetry">and full of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s blessing,</p>
<p class="poetry">possess the west and south.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blessing on Asher</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:24</span> Of Asher he said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Asher is blessed with children;</p>
<p class="poetry">may he be favored by his brothers,</p>
<p class="poetry">and may he dip his foot in olive oil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:25</span> The bars of your gates will be made of iron and bronze,</p>
<p class="poetry">and may you have lifelong strength.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">General Praise and Blessing</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:26</span> “There is no one like God, O Jeshurun, </p>
<p class="poetry">who rides through the sky to help you, </p>
<p class="poetry">on the clouds in majesty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:27</span> The everlasting God is a refuge, </p>
<p class="poetry">and underneath you are his eternal arms; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has driven out enemies before you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and has said, “Destroy!”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:28</span> Israel lives in safety,</p>
<p class="poetry">the fountain of Jacob is quite secure, </p>
<p class="poetry">in a land of grain and new wine;</p>
<p class="poetry">indeed, its heavens rain down dew. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">33:29</span> You have joy, Israel! Who is like you?</p>
<p class="poetry">You are a people delivered by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">your protective shield</p>
<p class="poetry">and your exalted sword.</p>
<p class="poetry">May your enemies cringe before you;</p>
<p class="poetry">may you trample on their backs.” </p>

</body>
</html>