<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Samuel 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Samuel<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Sends Trouble for the Philistines Who Have the Ark</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Now the Philistines had captured the ark of God and brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod. <span class="verse">5:2</span> The Philistines took the ark of God and brought it into the temple of Dagon, where they positioned it beside Dagon. <span class="verse">5:3</span> When the residents of Ashdod got up early the next day, Dagon was lying on the ground before the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. So they took Dagon and set him back in his place. <span class="verse">5:4</span> But when they got up early the following day, Dagon was again lying on the ground before the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. The head of Dagon and his two hands were sheared off and were lying at the threshold. Only Dagon’s body was left intact. <span class="verse">5:5</span> (For this reason, to this very day, neither Dagon’s priests nor anyone else who enters Dagon’s temple steps on Dagon’s threshold in Ashdod.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> attacked the residents of Ashdod severely, bringing devastation on them. He struck the people of both Ashdod and the surrounding area with sores. <span class="verse">5:7</span> When the people of Ashdod saw what was happening, they said, “The ark of the God of Israel should not remain with us, for he has attacked both us and our god Dagon!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:8</span> So they assembled all the leaders of the Philistines and asked, “What should we do with the ark of the God of Israel?” They replied, “The ark of the God of Israel should be moved to Gath.” So they moved the ark of the God of Israel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:9</span> But after it had been moved the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> attacked that city as well, causing a great deal of panic. He struck all the people of that city with sores. <span class="verse">5:10</span> So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. </p>
<p class="bodytext">But when the ark of God arrived at Ekron, the residents of Ekron cried out saying, “They have brought the ark of the God of Israel here to kill our people!” <span class="verse">5:11</span> So they assembled all the leaders of the Philistines and said, “Get the ark of the God of Israel out of here! Let it go back to its own place so that it won’t kill us and our people!” The terror of death was throughout the entire city; God was attacking them very severely there. <span class="verse">5:12</span> The people who did not die were struck with sores; the city’s cry for help went all the way up to heaven. </p>

</body>
</html>