<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 36</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 36</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, an oracle, written by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s servant David. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:1</span> An evil man is rebellious to the core. </p>
<p class="poetry">He does not fear God, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:2</span> for he is too proud</p>
<p class="poetry">to recognize and give up his sin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:3</span> The words he speaks are sinful and deceitful;</p>
<p class="poetry">he does not care about doing what is wise and right. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:4</span> While he lies in bed he plans ways to sin.</p>
<p class="poetry">He is committed to a sinful lifestyle; </p>
<p class="poetry">he does not reject what is evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:5</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, your loyal love reaches to the sky, </p>
<p class="poetry">your faithfulness to the clouds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:6</span> Your justice is like the highest mountains, </p>
<p class="poetry">your fairness like the deepest sea;</p>
<p class="poetry">you, <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, preserve mankind and the animal kingdom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:7</span> How precious is your loyal love, O God!</p>
<p class="poetry">The human race finds shelter under your wings. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:8</span> They are filled with food from your house,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you allow them to drink from the river of your delicacies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:9</span> For with you is the fountain of life;</p>
<p class="poetry">in your light we see light. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:10</span> Extend your loyal love to your faithful followers, </p>
<p class="poetry">and vindicate the morally upright. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:11</span> Do not let arrogant men overtake me,</p>
<p class="poetry">or let evil men make me homeless. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">36:12</span> I can see the evildoers! They have fallen. </p>
<p class="poetry">They have been knocked down and are unable to get up. </p>

</body>
</html>