<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Vision Three: The Surveyor</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> (2:5) I looked again, and there was a man with a measuring line in his hand. <span class="verse">2:2</span> I asked, “Where are you going?” He replied, “To measure Jerusalem in order to determine its width and its length.” <span class="verse">2:3</span> At this point the angelic messenger who spoke to me went out, and another messenger came to meet him <span class="verse">2:4</span> and said to him, “Hurry, speak to this young man as follows: ‘Jerusalem will no longer be enclosed by walls because of the multitude of people and animals there. <span class="verse">2:5</span> But I,’ the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, ‘will be a wall of fire surrounding Jerusalem and the source of glory in her midst.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:6</span> “You there! Flee from the northland!” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, “for like the four winds of heaven I have scattered you,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">2:7</span> “Escape, Zion, you who live among the Babylonians!” <span class="verse">2:8</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says: “For his own glory he has sent me to the nations that plundered you—for anyone who touches you touches the pupil of his eye. <span class="verse">2:9</span> Yes, look here, I am about to punish them so that they will be looted by their own slaves.” Then you will know that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has sent me.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:10</span> “Sing out and be happy, Zion my daughter! For look, I have come; I will settle in your midst,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">2:11</span> “Many nations will join themselves to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> on the day of salvation, and they will also be my people. Indeed, I will settle in the midst of you all. Then you will know that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has sent me to you. <span class="verse">2:12</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will take possession of Judah as his portion in the holy land and he will choose Jerusalem once again. <span class="verse">2:13</span> Be silent in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s presence, all people everywhere, for he is being moved to action in his holy dwelling place.” </p>

</body>
</html>