<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Moab</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:1</span> This is an oracle about Moab:</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, in a night it is devastated,</p>
<p class="poetry">Ar of Moab is destroyed!</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, in a night it is devastated,</p>
<p class="poetry">Kir of Moab is destroyed! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:2</span> They went up to the temple; </p>
<p class="poetry">the people of Dibon went up to the high places to lament. </p>
<p class="poetry">Because of what happened to Nebo and Medeba, Moab wails.</p>
<p class="poetry">Every head is shaved bare,</p>
<p class="poetry">every beard is trimmed off. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:3</span> In their streets they wear sackcloth;</p>
<p class="poetry">on their roofs and in their town squares</p>
<p class="poetry">all of them wail;</p>
<p class="poetry">they fall down weeping. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:4</span> The people of Heshbon and Elealeh cry out;</p>
<p class="poetry">their voices are heard as far away as Jahaz.</p>
<p class="poetry">For this reason Moab’s soldiers shout in distress;</p>
<p class="poetry">their courage wavers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:5</span> My heart cries out because of Moab’s plight, </p>
<p class="poetry">and for the fugitives stretched out as far as Zoar and Eglath Shelishiyah.</p>
<p class="poetry">For they weep as they make their way up the ascent of Luhith;</p>
<p class="poetry">they loudly lament their demise on the road to Horonaim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:6</span> For the waters of Nimrim are gone; </p>
<p class="poetry">the grass is dried up,</p>
<p class="poetry">the vegetation has disappeared,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there are no plants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:7</span> For this reason what they have made and stored up,</p>
<p class="poetry">they carry over the Stream of the Poplars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:8</span> Indeed, the cries of distress echo throughout Moabite territory;</p>
<p class="poetry">their wailing can be heard in Eglaim and Beer Elim. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:9</span> Indeed, the waters of Dimon are full of blood!</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, I will heap even more trouble on Dimon. </p>
<p class="poetry">A lion will attack the Moabite fugitives</p>
<p class="poetry">and the people left in the land. </p>

</body>
</html>