<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hebrews 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus and Moses</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Therefore, holy brothers and sisters, partners in a heavenly calling, take note of Jesus, the apostle and high priest whom we confess, <span class="verse">3:2</span> who is faithful to the one who appointed him, as Moses was also in God’s house. <span class="verse">3:3</span> For he has come to deserve greater glory than Moses, just as the builder of a house deserves greater honor than the house itself! <span class="verse">3:4</span> For every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God. <span class="verse">3:5</span> Now Moses was <b><i>faithful</i></b> <b><i>in all God’s</i></b> <b><i>house</i></b> as a servant, to testify to the things that would be spoken. <span class="verse">3:6</span> But Christ is faithful as a son over God’s house. We are of his house, if in fact we hold firmly to our confidence and the hope we take pride in. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exposition of Psalm 95: Hearing God’s Word in Faith</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:7</span> Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says, </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>Oh, that today you would listen as he speaks!</b></i> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> “<i><b>Do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, in the day of testing in the wilderness</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> “<i><b>There your fathers tested me and tried me</b>,</i> <i><b>and they saw my works for forty years</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> “<i><b>Therefore, I became provoked at that generation and said</b></i>, ‘<b><i>Their hearts are always wandering</i></b> <i><b>and they have not known my ways</b></i>.’</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> “<i><b>As I swore in my anger</b></i>, ‘<b><i>They will never enter my rest!</i></b>’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> See to it, brothers and sisters, that none of you has an evil, unbelieving heart that forsakes the living God. <span class="verse">3:13</span> But exhort one another each day, as long as it is called “Today,” that none of you may become hardened by sin’s deception. <span class="verse">3:14</span> For we have become partners with Christ, if in fact we hold our initial confidence firm until the end. <span class="verse">3:15</span> As it says, “<i><b>Oh, that today you would listen as he speaks!</b></i> <b><i>Do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion</i></b>.” <span class="verse">3:16</span> For which ones heard and rebelled? Was it not all who came out of Egypt under Moses’ leadership? <span class="verse">3:17</span> And against whom was God provoked for forty years? Was it not those who sinned, <i>whose</i> <i>dead bodies fell in the wilderness</i>? <span class="verse">3:18</span> And to whom did he swear they would never enter into his rest, except those who were disobedient? <span class="verse">3:19</span> So we see that they could not enter because of unbelief. </p>

</body>
</html>