<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 61</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 61</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Rejuvenate His People</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:1</span> The Spirit of the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is upon me,</p>
<p class="poetry">because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has chosen me. </p>
<p class="poetry">He has commissioned me to encourage the poor,</p>
<p class="poetry">to help the brokenhearted,</p>
<p class="poetry">to decree the release of captives,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the freeing of prisoners, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:2</span> to announce the year when the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will show his favor,</p>
<p class="poetry">the day when our God will seek vengeance, </p>
<p class="poetry">to console all who mourn, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:3</span> to strengthen those who mourn in Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">by giving them a turban, instead of ashes,</p>
<p class="poetry">oil symbolizing joy, instead of mourning,</p>
<p class="poetry">a garment symbolizing praise, instead of discouragement. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will be called oaks of righteousness, </p>
<p class="poetry">trees planted by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> to reveal his splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:4</span> They will rebuild the perpetual ruins</p>
<p class="poetry">and restore the places that were desolate; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will reestablish the ruined cities,</p>
<p class="poetry">the places that have been desolate since ancient times.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:5</span>  “Foreigners will take care of your sheep;</p>
<p class="poetry">foreigners will work in your fields and vineyards. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:6</span> You will be called, ‘the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s priests,</p>
<p class="poetry">servants of our God.’ </p>
<p class="poetry">You will enjoy the wealth of nations</p>
<p class="poetry">and boast about the riches you receive from them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:7</span> Instead of shame, you will get a double portion; </p>
<p class="poetry">instead of humiliation, they will rejoice over the land they receive. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, they will possess a double portion in their land</p>
<p class="poetry">and experience lasting joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:8</span> For I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, love justice</p>
<p class="poetry">and hate robbery and sin.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will repay them because of my faithfulness; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will make a permanent covenant with them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:9</span> Their descendants will be known among the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">their offspring among the peoples.</p>
<p class="poetry">All who see them will recognize that</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has blessed them.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:10</span> I will greatly rejoice in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will be overjoyed because of my God. </p>
<p class="poetry">For he clothes me in garments of deliverance;</p>
<p class="poetry">he puts on me a robe symbolizing vindication. </p>
<p class="poetry">I look like a bridegroom when he wears a turban as a priest would;</p>
<p class="poetry">I look like a bride when she puts on her jewelry. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">61:11</span> For just as the ground produces its crops</p>
<p class="poetry">and a garden yields its produce,</p>
<p class="poetry">so the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will cause deliverance to grow,</p>
<p class="poetry">and give his people reason to praise him in the sight of all the nations. </p>

</body>
</html>