<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Thessalonians 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">1:2</span> Grace and peace to you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Thanksgiving</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> We ought to thank God always for you, brothers and sisters, and rightly so, because your faith flourishes more and more and the love of each one of you all for one another is ever greater. <span class="verse">1:4</span> As a result we ourselves boast about you in the churches of God for your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and afflictions you are enduring. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Encouragement in Persecution</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:5</span> This is evidence of God’s righteous judgment, to make you worthy of the kingdom of God, for which in fact you are suffering. <span class="verse">1:6</span> For it is right for God to repay with affliction those who afflict you, <span class="verse">1:7</span> and to you who are being afflicted to give rest together with us when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels. <span class="verse">1:8</span> <i>With</i> <i>flaming fire he will mete out</i> <i>punishment</i> <i>on those who do not know God</i> and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. <span class="verse">1:9</span> They will undergo the penalty of eternal destruction, <i>away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his strength</i>, <span class="verse">1:10</span> when he comes to be glorified among his saints and admired on that day among all who have believed—and you did in fact believe our testimony. <span class="verse">1:11</span> And in this regard we pray for you always, that our God will make you worthy of his calling and fulfill by his power your every desire for goodness and every work of faith, <span class="verse">1:12</span> that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. </p>

</body>
</html>