<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Timothy 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Timothy<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to further the promise of life in Christ Jesus, <span class="verse">1:2</span> to Timothy, my dear child. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Thanksgiving and Charge to Timothy</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> I am thankful to God, whom I have served with a clear conscience as my ancestors did, when I remember you in my prayers as I do constantly night and day. <span class="verse">1:4</span> As I remember your tears, I long to see you, so that I may be filled with joy. <span class="verse">1:5</span> I recall your sincere faith that was alive first in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice, and I am sure is in you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:6</span> Because of this I remind you to rekindle God’s gift that you possess through the laying on of my hands. <span class="verse">1:7</span> For God did not give us a Spirit of fear but of power and love and self-control. <span class="verse">1:8</span> So do not be ashamed of the testimony about our Lord or of me, a prisoner for his sake, but by God’s power accept your share of suffering for the gospel. <span class="verse">1:9</span> He is the one who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not based on our works but on his own purpose and grace, granted to us in Christ Jesus before time began, <span class="verse">1:10</span> but now made visible through the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus. He has broken the power of death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel! <span class="verse">1:11</span> For this gospel I was appointed a preacher and apostle and teacher. <span class="verse">1:12</span> Because of this, in fact, I suffer as I do. But I am not ashamed, because I know the one in whom my faith is set and I am convinced that he is able to protect what has been entrusted to me until that day. <span class="verse">1:13</span> Hold to the standard of sound words that you heard from me and do so with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">1:14</span> Protect that good thing entrusted to you, through the Holy Spirit who lives within us. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:15</span> You know that everyone in the province of Asia deserted me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes. <span class="verse">1:16</span> May the Lord grant mercy to the family of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my imprisonment. <span class="verse">1:17</span> But when he arrived in Rome, he eagerly searched for me and found me. <span class="verse">1:18</span> May the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord on that day! And you know very well all the ways he served me in Ephesus. </p>

</body>
</html>