<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:1</span> A wise son accepts his father’s discipline, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a scoffer has never listened to rebuke. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:2</span> From the fruit of his speech a person eats good things, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the treacherous desire the fruit of violence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:3</span> The one who guards his words guards his life;</p>
<p class="poetry">whoever is talkative will come to ruin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:4</span> The appetite of the sluggard craves but gets nothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the desire of the diligent will be abundantly satisfied. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:5</span> The righteous person will reject anything false, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the wicked person will act in shameful disgrace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:6</span> Righteousness guards the one who lives with integrity, </p>
<p class="poetry">but wickedness overthrows the sinner. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:7</span> There is one who pretends to be rich and yet has nothing;</p>
<p class="poetry">another pretends to be poor and yet possesses great wealth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:8</span> The ransom of a person’s life is his wealth,</p>
<p class="poetry">thus the poor person has never heard a threat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:9</span> The light of the righteous shines brightly, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the lamp of the wicked goes out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:10</span> With pride comes only contention,</p>
<p class="poetry">but wisdom is with the well-advised. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:11</span> Wealth gained quickly will dwindle away, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who gathers it little by little will become rich. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:12</span> Hope deferred makes the heart sick, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a longing fulfilled is like a tree of life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:13</span> The one who despises instruction will pay the penalty, </p>
<p class="poetry">but whoever esteems direction will be rewarded. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:14</span> Instruction from the wise is like a life-giving fountain, </p>
<p class="poetry">to turn a person from deadly snares. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:15</span> Keen insight wins favor,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the conduct of the treacherous ends in destruction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:16</span> Every shrewd person acts with knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">but a fool displays his folly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:17</span> An unreliable messenger falls into trouble, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a faithful envoy brings healing. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:18</span> The one who neglects discipline ends up in poverty and shame,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who accepts reproof is honored. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:19</span> A desire fulfilled will be sweet to the soul,</p>
<p class="poetry">but fools abhor turning away from evil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:20</span> The one who associates with the wise grows wise, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a companion of fools suffers harm. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:21</span> Calamity pursues sinners,</p>
<p class="poetry">but prosperity rewards the righteous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:22</span> A good person leaves an inheritance for his grandchildren,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the wealth of a sinner is stored up for the righteous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:23</span> Abundant food may come from the field of the poor, </p>
<p class="poetry">but it is swept away by injustice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:24</span> The one who spares his rod hates his child, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the one who loves his child is diligent in disciplining him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">13:25</span> The righteous has enough food to satisfy his appetite, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the belly of the wicked will be empty. </p>

</body>
</html>