<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Death is Imminent</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Listen to this funeral song I am ready to sing about you, family of Israel: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> “The virgin Israel has fallen down and will not get up again.</p>
<p class="poetry">She is abandoned on her own land </p>
<p class="poetry">with no one to help her get up.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:3</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says this:</p>
<p class="poetry">“The city that marches out with a thousand soldiers will have only a hundred left;</p>
<p class="poetry">the town that marches out with a hundred soldiers will have only ten left for the family of Israel.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:4</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says this to the family of Israel:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Seek me so you can live! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> Do not seek Bethel. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not visit Gilgal.</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not journey down to Beer Sheba.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the people of Gilgal will certainly be carried into exile, </p>
<p class="poetry">and Bethel will become a place where disaster abounds.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:6</span> Seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> so you can live!</p>
<p class="poetry">Otherwise he will break out like fire against Joseph’s family; </p>
<p class="poetry">the fire will consume </p>
<p class="poetry">and no one will be able to quench it and save Bethel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> The Israelites turn justice into bitterness; </p>
<p class="poetry">they throw what is fair and right to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:8</span> But there is one who made the constellations Pleiades and Orion;</p>
<p class="poetry">he can turn the darkness into morning</p>
<p class="poetry">and daylight into night.</p>
<p class="poetry">He summons the water of the seas</p>
<p class="poetry">and pours it out on the earth’s surface.</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is his name! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> He flashes destruction down upon the strong </p>
<p class="poetry">so that destruction overwhelms the fortified places. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:10</span> The Israelites hate anyone who arbitrates at the city gate; </p>
<p class="poetry">they despise anyone who speaks honestly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> Therefore, because you make the poor pay taxes on their crops </p>
<p class="poetry">and exact a grain tax from them,</p>
<p class="poetry">you will not live in the houses you built with chiseled stone,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor will you drink the wine from the fine vineyards you planted. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> Certainly I am aware of your many rebellious acts </p>
<p class="poetry">and your numerous sins.</p>
<p class="poetry">You torment the innocent, you take bribes,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you deny justice to the needy at the city gate. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> For this reason whoever is smart keeps quiet in such a time,</p>
<p class="poetry">for it is an evil time. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:14</span> Seek good and not evil so you can live!</p>
<p class="poetry">Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies just might be with you, </p>
<p class="poetry">as you claim he is.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> Hate what is wrong, love what is right.</p>
<p class="poetry">Promote justice at the city gate. </p>
<p class="poetry">Maybe the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies will have mercy on those who are left from Joseph. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:16</span> Because of Israel’s sins this is what the Lord, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies, says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“In all the squares there will be wailing,</p>
<p class="poetry">in all the streets they will mourn the dead. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will tell the field workers to lament</p>
<p class="poetry">and the professional mourners to wail. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:17</span> In all the vineyards there will be wailing,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I will pass through your midst,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Demands Justice</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:18</span> Woe to those who wish for the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you want the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s day of judgment to come?</p>
<p class="poetry">It will bring darkness, not light. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:19</span> Disaster will be inescapable, </p>
<p class="poetry">as if a man ran from a lion only to meet a bear, </p>
<p class="poetry">then escaped into a house, </p>
<p class="poetry">leaned his hand against the wall, </p>
<p class="poetry">and was bitten by a poisonous snake. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:20</span> Don’t you realize the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s day of judgment will bring darkness, not light—</p>
<p class="poetry">gloomy blackness, not bright light? </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:21</span> “I absolutely despise your festivals!</p>
<p class="poetry">I get no pleasure from your religious assemblies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:22</span> Even if you offer me burnt and grain offerings, I will not be satisfied;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not look with favor on your peace offerings of fattened calves. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:23</span> Take away from me your noisy songs;</p>
<p class="poetry">I don’t want to hear the music of your stringed instruments. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:24</span> Justice must flow like torrents of water,</p>
<p class="poetry">righteous actions like a stream that never dries up. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">5:25</span> You did not bring me sacrifices and grain offerings during the forty years you spent in the wilderness, family of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:26</span> You will pick up your images of Sikkuth, your king, </p>
<p class="poetry">and Kiyyun, your star god, which you made for yourselves,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:27</span> and I will drive you into exile beyond Damascus,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">He is called the God of Heaven’s Armies. </p>

</body>
</html>