<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 31</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 31</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job Vindicates Himself</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:1</span> “I made a covenant with my eyes;</p>
<p class="poetry">how then could I entertain thoughts against a virgin? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:2</span> What then would be one’s lot from God above,</p>
<p class="poetry">one’s heritage from the Almighty on high? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:3</span> Is it not misfortune for the unjust,</p>
<p class="poetry">and disaster for those who work iniquity? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:4</span> Does he not see my ways</p>
<p class="poetry">and count all my steps? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:5</span> If I have walked in falsehood,</p>
<p class="poetry">and if my foot has hastened to deceit—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:6</span> let him weigh me with honest scales;</p>
<p class="poetry">then God will discover my integrity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:7</span> If my footsteps have strayed from the way,</p>
<p class="poetry">if my heart has gone after my eyes, </p>
<p class="poetry">or if anything has defiled my hands, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:8</span> then let me sow and let another eat,</p>
<p class="poetry">and let my crops be uprooted. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:9</span> If my heart has been enticed by a woman,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I have lain in wait at my neighbor’s door, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:10</span> then let my wife turn the millstone for another man,</p>
<p class="poetry">and may other men commit adultery with her. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:11</span> For I would have committed a shameful act, </p>
<p class="poetry">an iniquity to be judged. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:12</span> For it is a fire that devours even to Destruction, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it would uproot all my harvest. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">31:13</span> “If I have disregarded the right of my male servants </p>
<p class="poetry">or my female servants</p>
<p class="poetry">when they disputed with me,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:14</span> then what will I do when God confronts me in judgment; </p>
<p class="poetry">when he intervenes, </p>
<p class="poetry">how will I respond to him?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:15</span> Did not the one who made me in the womb make them? </p>
<p class="poetry">Did not the same one form us in the womb? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:16</span> If I have refused to give the poor what they desired, </p>
<p class="poetry">or caused the eyes of the widow to fail, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:17</span> If I ate my morsel of bread myself,</p>
<p class="poetry">and did not share any of it with orphans —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:18</span> but from my youth I raised the orphan like a father,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from my mother’s womb I guided the widow —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:19</span> If I have seen anyone about to perish for lack of clothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">or a poor man without a coat, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:20</span> whose heart did not bless me </p>
<p class="poetry">as he warmed himself with the fleece of my sheep, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:21</span> if I have raised my hand to vote against the orphan,</p>
<p class="poetry">when I saw my support in the court, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:22</span> then let my arm fall from the shoulder, </p>
<p class="poetry">let my arm be broken off at the socket. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:23</span> For the calamity from God was a terror to me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and by reason of his majesty I was powerless. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">31:24</span> “If I have put my confidence in gold</p>
<p class="poetry">or said to pure gold, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘You are my security!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:25</span> if I have rejoiced because of the extent of my wealth,</p>
<p class="poetry">or because of the great wealth my hand had gained,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:26</span> if I looked at the sun when it was shining,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the moon advancing as a precious thing,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:27</span> so that my heart was secretly enticed,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my hand threw them a kiss from my mouth, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:28</span> then this also would be iniquity to be judged, </p>
<p class="poetry">for I would have been false to God above. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:29</span> If I have rejoiced over the misfortune of my enemy </p>
<p class="poetry">or exulted because calamity found him—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:30</span> I have not even permitted my mouth to sin</p>
<p class="poetry">by asking for his life through a curse—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:31</span> if the members of my household have never said, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘If only there were someone </p>
<p class="poetry">who has not been satisfied from Job’s meat!’—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:32</span> But no stranger had to spend the night outside,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I opened my doors to the traveler —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:33</span> if I have covered my transgressions as men do, </p>
<p class="poetry">by hiding iniquity in my heart, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:34</span> because I was terrified of the great multitude, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the contempt of families terrified me,</p>
<p class="poetry">so that I remained silent</p>
<p class="poetry">and would not go outdoors—</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Appeal</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:35</span> “If only I had someone to hear me!</p>
<p class="poetry">Here is my signature — </p>
<p class="poetry">let the Almighty answer me!</p>
<p class="poetry">If only I had an indictment </p>
<p class="poetry">that my accuser had written. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:36</span> Surely I would wear it proudly on my shoulder,</p>
<p class="poetry">I would bind it on me like a crown; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:37</span> I would give him an accounting of my steps;</p>
<p class="poetry">like a prince I would draw near to him.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Final Solemn Oath </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:38</span> “If my land cried out against me </p>
<p class="poetry">and all its furrows wept together, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:39</span> if I have eaten its produce without paying, </p>
<p class="poetry">or caused the death of its owners, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">31:40</span> then let thorns sprout up in place of wheat,</p>
<p class="poetry">and in place of barley, noxious weeds.” </p>
<p class="bodytext">The words of Job are ended.</p>

</body>
</html>