<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Peter 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Peter<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> So get rid of all evil and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all slander. <span class="verse">2:2</span> And yearn like newborn infants for pure, spiritual milk, so that by it you may grow up to salvation, <span class="verse">2:3</span> if <b><i>you have experienced</i></b> <i><b>the Lord’s kindness</b></i>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Living Stone, a Chosen People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> So as you come to him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen and precious in God’s sight, <span class="verse">2:5</span> you yourselves, as living stones, are built up as a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood and to offer spiritual sacrifices that are acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">2:6</span> For it says in scripture, “<i><b>Look, I lay in Zion a stone, a chosen and precious cornerstone</b>,</i> <b><i>and</i></b> <b><i>whoever believes</i></b> <b><i>in</i></b> <b><i>him</i></b> <b><i>will</i></b> <b><i>never</i></b> <i><b>be put to shame</b></i>.” <span class="verse">2:7</span> So you who believe see his value, but for those who do not believe, <b><i>the stone that the builders rejected has become the</i></b> <i><b>cornerstone</b>,</i> <span class="verse">2:8</span> and <b><i>a stumbling-stone</i></b> <i><b>and a rock to trip over</b></i>. They stumble because they disobey the word, as they were destined to do. <span class="verse">2:9</span> But you are <i>a chosen race</i>, <i>a royal priesthood</i>, <i>a holy nation</i>, <i>a people of his own</i>, so that you may <i>proclaim</i> <i>the virtues</i> of the one who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. <span class="verse">2:10</span> You once were <b><i>not</i></b> <b><i>a people</i></b>, but now you are God’s people. You were <b><i>shown</i></b> <b><i>no mercy,</i></b> but now you have received mercy. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Dear friends, I urge you as foreigners and exiles to keep away from fleshly desires that do battle against the soul, <span class="verse">2:12</span> and maintain good conduct among the non-Christians, so that though they now malign you as wrongdoers, they may see your good deeds and glorify God when he appears. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Submission to Authorities</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:13</span> Be subject to every human institution for the Lord’s sake, whether to a king as supreme <span class="verse">2:14</span> or to governors as those he commissions to punish wrongdoers and praise those who do good. <span class="verse">2:15</span> For God wants you to silence the ignorance of foolish people by doing good. <span class="verse">2:16</span> Live as free people, not using your freedom as a pretext for evil, but as God’s slaves. <span class="verse">2:17</span> Honor all people, love the family of believers, fear God, honor the king. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:18</span> Slaves, be subject to your masters with all reverence, not only to those who are good and gentle, but also to those who are perverse. <span class="verse">2:19</span> For this finds God’s favor, if because of conscience toward God someone endures hardships in suffering unjustly. <span class="verse">2:20</span> For what credit is it if you sin and are mistreated and endure it? But if you do good and suffer and so endure, this finds favor with God. <span class="verse">2:21</span> For to this you were called, since Christ also suffered for you, leaving an example for you to follow in his steps. <span class="verse">2:22</span> He <b><i>committed</i></b> <b><i>no</i></b> sin <b><i>nor</i></b> <b><i>was deceit found in his mouth</i></b>. <span class="verse">2:23</span> When he was maligned, he did not answer back; when he suffered, he threatened no retaliation, but committed himself to God who judges justly. <span class="verse">2:24</span> He <b><i>himself</i></b> <b><i>bore our sins</i></b> in his body on the tree, that we may cease from sinning and live for righteousness. <b><i>By</i></b> his <b><i>wounds</i></b> <b><i>you were healed</i></b>. <span class="verse">2:25</span> For you were <b><i>going astray like sheep</i></b> but now you have turned back to the shepherd and guardian of your souls. </p>

</body>
</html>