<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Birth of Ishmael</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:1</span> Now Sarai, Abram’s wife, had not given birth to any children, but she had an Egyptian servant named Hagar. <span class="verse">16:2</span> So Sarai said to Abram, “Since the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has prevented me from having children, please sleep with my servant. Perhaps I can have a family by her.” Abram did what Sarai told him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:3</span> So after Abram had lived in Canaan for ten years, Sarai, Abram’s wife, gave Hagar, her Egyptian servant, to her husband to be his wife. <span class="verse">16:4</span> He slept with Hagar, and she became pregnant. Once Hagar realized she was pregnant, she despised Sarai. <span class="verse">16:5</span> Then Sarai said to Abram, “You have brought this wrong on me! I gave my servant into your embrace, but when she realized that she was pregnant, she despised me. May the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> judge between you and me!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:6</span> Abram said to Sarai, “Since your servant is under your authority, do to her whatever you think best.” Then Sarai treated Hagar harshly, so she ran away from Sarai. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:7</span> The angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> found Hagar near a spring of water in the wilderness—the spring that is along the road to Shur. <span class="verse">16:8</span> He said, “Hagar, servant of Sarai, where have you come from, and where are you going?” She replied, “I’m running away from my mistress, Sarai.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:9</span> Then the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to her, “Return to your mistress and submit to her authority. <span class="verse">16:10</span> I will greatly multiply your descendants,” the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> added, “so that they will be too numerous to count.” <span class="verse">16:11</span> Then the angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to her,</p>
<p class="poetry">“You are now pregnant</p>
<p class="poetry">and are about to give birth to a son.</p>
<p class="poetry">You are to name him Ishmael, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has heard your painful groans. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">16:12</span> He will be a wild donkey of a man.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will be hostile to everyone, </p>
<p class="poetry">and everyone will be hostile to him. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will live away from his brothers.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:13</span> So Hagar named the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who spoke to her, “You are the God who sees me,” for she said, “Here I have seen one who sees me!” <span class="verse">16:14</span> That is why the well was called Beer Lahai Roi. (It is located between Kadesh and Bered.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:15</span> So Hagar gave birth to Abram’s son, whom Abram named Ishmael. <span class="verse">16:16</span> (Now Abram was 86 years old when Hagar gave birth to Ishmael.) </p>

</body>
</html>