<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Deuteronomy 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Deuteronomy<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Keep the Covenant Principles</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Now these are the commandments, statutes, and ordinances that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God instructed me to teach you so that you may carry them out in the land where you are headed <span class="verse">6:2</span> and that you may so revere the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God that you will keep all his statutes and commandments that I am giving you—you, your children, and your grandchildren—all your lives, to prolong your days. <span class="verse">6:3</span> Pay attention, Israel, and be careful to do this so that it may go well with you and that you may increase greatly in number —as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of your ancestors, said to you, you will have a land flowing with milk and honey. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Essence of the Covenant Principles</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:4</span> Hear, O Israel: The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is our God, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is one! <span class="verse">6:5</span> You must love the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God with your whole mind, your whole being, and all your strength. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Teach the Covenant Principles</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:6</span> These words I am commanding you today must be kept in mind, <span class="verse">6:7</span> and you must teach them to your children and speak of them as you sit in your house, as you walk along the road, as you lie down, and as you get up. <span class="verse">6:8</span> You should tie them as a reminder on your forearm and fasten them as symbols on your forehead. <span class="verse">6:9</span> Inscribe them on the doorframes of your houses and gates. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Worship the Lord Exclusively</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:10</span> Then when the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God brings you to the land he promised your ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to give you—a land with large, fine cities you did not build, <span class="verse">6:11</span> houses filled with choice things you did not accumulate, hewn-out cisterns you did not dig, and vineyards and olive groves you did not plant—and you eat your fill, <span class="verse">6:12</span> be careful not to forget the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who brought you out of Egypt, that place of slavery. <span class="verse">6:13</span> You must revere the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, serve him, and take oaths using only his name. <span class="verse">6:14</span> You must not go after other gods, those of the surrounding peoples, <span class="verse">6:15</span> for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God, who is present among you, is a jealous God—his anger will erupt against you and remove you from the land. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Obey the Lord Exclusively</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:16</span> You must not put the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God to the test as you did at Massah. <span class="verse">6:17</span> Keep his commandments very carefully, as well as the stipulations and statutes he commanded you to observe. <span class="verse">6:18</span> Do whatever is proper and good before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> so that it may go well with you and that you may enter and occupy the good land that he promised your ancestors, <span class="verse">6:19</span> and that you may drive out all your enemies just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Remember the Past</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:20</span> When your children ask you later on, “What are the stipulations, statutes, and ordinances that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God commanded you?” <span class="verse">6:21</span> you must say to them, “We were Pharaoh’s slaves in Egypt, but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> brought us out of Egypt in a powerful way. <span class="verse">6:22</span> And he brought signs and great, devastating wonders on Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on his whole family before our very eyes. <span class="verse">6:23</span> He delivered us from there so that he could give us the land he had promised our ancestors. <span class="verse">6:24</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded us to obey all these statutes and to revere him so that it may always go well for us and he may preserve us, as he has to this day. <span class="verse">6:25</span> We will be innocent if we carefully keep all these commandments before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God, just as he demands.” </p>

</body>
</html>