<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 49</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 49</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm by the Korahites.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:1</span> Listen to this, all you nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention, all you inhabitants of the world. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:2</span> Pay attention, all you people, </p>
<p class="poetry">both rich and poor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:3</span> I will declare a wise saying; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will share my profound thoughts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:4</span> I will learn a song that imparts wisdom;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will then sing my insightful song to the accompaniment of a harp. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:5</span> Why should I be afraid in times of trouble, </p>
<p class="poetry">when the sinful deeds of deceptive men threaten to overwhelm me? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:6</span> They trust in their wealth</p>
<p class="poetry">and boast in their great riches. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:7</span> Certainly a man cannot rescue his brother; </p>
<p class="poetry">he cannot pay God an adequate ransom price </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:8</span> (the ransom price for a human life is too high,</p>
<p class="poetry">and people go to their final destiny), </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:9</span> so that he might continue to live forever</p>
<p class="poetry">and not experience death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:10</span> Surely one sees that even wise people die; </p>
<p class="poetry">fools and spiritually insensitive people all pass away </p>
<p class="poetry">and leave their wealth to others. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:11</span> Their grave becomes their permanent residence,</p>
<p class="poetry">their eternal dwelling place. </p>
<p class="poetry">They name their lands after themselves, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:12</span> but, despite their wealth, people do not last. </p>
<p class="poetry">They are like animals that perish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:13</span> This is the destiny of fools, </p>
<p class="poetry">and of those who approve of their philosophy. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:14</span> They will travel to Sheol like sheep, </p>
<p class="poetry">with death as their shepherd. </p>
<p class="poetry">The godly will rule over them when the day of vindication dawns. </p>
<p class="poetry">Sheol will consume their bodies, and they will no longer live in impressive houses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:15</span> But God will rescue my life from the power of Sheol;</p>
<p class="poetry">certainly he will pull me to safety. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:16</span> Do not be afraid when a man becomes rich </p>
<p class="poetry">and his wealth multiplies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:17</span> For he will take nothing with him when he dies;</p>
<p class="poetry">his wealth will not follow him down into the grave. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:18</span> He pronounces this blessing on himself while he is alive:</p>
<p class="poetry">“May men praise you, for you have done well.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:19</span> But he will join his ancestors; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will never again see the light of day. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">49:20</span> Wealthy people do not understand; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are like animals that perish. </p>

</body>
</html>