<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job Replies to Eliphaz</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Then Job responded: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:2</span> “Oh, if only my grief could be weighed, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my misfortune laid on the scales too! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:3</span> But because it is heavier than the sand of the sea,</p>
<p class="poetry">that is why my words have been wild. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:4</span> For the arrows of the Almighty are within me;</p>
<p class="poetry">my spirit drinks their poison; </p>
<p class="poetry">God’s sudden terrors are arrayed against me. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Complaints Reflect Suffering</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:5</span> “Does the wild donkey bray when it is near grass? </p>
<p class="poetry">Or does the ox bellow over its fodder? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:6</span> Can food that is tasteless be eaten without salt?</p>
<p class="poetry">Or is there any taste in the white of an egg? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:7</span> I have refused to touch such things; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are like loathsome food to me. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Cry for Death</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:8</span> “Oh that my request would be realized, </p>
<p class="poetry">and that God would grant me what I long for! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:9</span> And that God would be willing to crush me,</p>
<p class="poetry">that he would let loose his hand </p>
<p class="poetry">and kill me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:10</span> Then I would yet have my comfort, </p>
<p class="poetry">then I would rejoice, </p>
<p class="poetry">in spite of pitiless pain, </p>
<p class="poetry">for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:11</span> What is my strength, that I should wait? </p>
<p class="poetry">And what is my end, </p>
<p class="poetry">that I should prolong my life? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:12</span> Is my strength like that of stones? </p>
<p class="poetry">Or is my flesh made of bronze? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:13</span> Is not my power to help myself nothing,</p>
<p class="poetry">and has not every resource been driven from me?</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Disappointing Friends</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:14</span> “To the one in despair, kindness should come from his friend </p>
<p class="poetry">even if he forsakes the fear of the Almighty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:15</span> My brothers have been as treacherous as a seasonal stream, </p>
<p class="poetry">and as the riverbeds of the intermittent streams </p>
<p class="poetry">that flow away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:16</span> They are dark because of ice;</p>
<p class="poetry">snow is piled up over them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:17</span> When they are scorched, they dry up,</p>
<p class="poetry">when it is hot, they vanish from their place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:18</span> Caravans turn aside from their routes;</p>
<p class="poetry">they go into the wasteland and perish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:19</span> The caravans of Tema looked intently for these streams; </p>
<p class="poetry">the traveling merchants of Sheba hoped for them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:20</span> They were distressed, </p>
<p class="poetry">because each one had been so confident;</p>
<p class="poetry">they arrived there, but were disappointed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:21</span> For now you have become like these streams that are no help; </p>
<p class="poetry">you see a terror, and are afraid. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Friends’ Fears</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:22</span> “Have I ever said, ‘Give me something,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from your fortune make gifts in my favor’?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:23</span> Or, ‘Deliver me from the enemy’s power, </p>
<p class="poetry">and from the hand of tyrants ransom me’?</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">No Sin Discovered</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:24</span> “Teach me and I, for my part, will be silent;</p>
<p class="poetry">explain to me how I have been mistaken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:25</span> How painful are honest words!</p>
<p class="poetry">But what does your reproof prove? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:26</span> Do you intend to criticize mere words,</p>
<p class="poetry">and treat the words of a despairing man as wind? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:27</span> Yes, you would gamble for the fatherless,</p>
<p class="poetry">and auction off your friend. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Other Explanation</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:28</span> “Now then, be good enough to look at me; </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will not lie to your face! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:29</span> Relent, let there be no falsehood; </p>
<p class="poetry">reconsider, for my righteousness is intact! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:30</span> Is there any falsehood on my lips?</p>
<p class="poetry">Can my mouth not discern evil things? </p>

</body>
</html>