<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Regulations for the Lampstand and the Table of Bread </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">24:2</span> “Command the Israelites to bring to you pure oil of beaten olives for the light, to make a lamp burn continually. <span class="verse">24:3</span> Outside the special curtain of the congregation in the Meeting Tent, Aaron must arrange it from evening until morning before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> continually. This is a perpetual statute throughout your generations. <span class="verse">24:4</span> On the ceremonially pure lampstand he must arrange the lamps before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> continually. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:5</span> “You must take choice wheat flour and bake twelve loaves; there must be two-tenths of an ephah of flour in each loaf, <span class="verse">24:6</span> and you must set them in two rows, six in a row, on the ceremonially pure table before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">24:7</span> You must put pure frankincense on each row, and it will become a memorial portion for the bread, a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">24:8</span> Each Sabbath day Aaron must arrange it before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> continually; this portion is from the Israelites as a perpetual covenant. <span class="verse">24:9</span> It will belong to Aaron and his sons, and they must eat it in a holy place because it is most holy to him, a perpetually-allotted portion from the gifts of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Case of Blaspheming the Name </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:10</span> Now an Israelite woman’s son whose father was an Egyptian went out among the Israelites, and the Israelite woman’s son and an Israelite man had a fight in the camp. <span class="verse">24:11</span> The Israelite woman’s son misused the Name and cursed, so they brought him to Moses. (Now his mother’s name was Shelomith, daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.) <span class="verse">24:12</span> So they placed him in custody until they were able to make a clear legal decision for themselves based on words from the mouth of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:13</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">24:14</span> “Bring the one who cursed outside the camp, and all who heard him are to lay their hands on his head, and the whole congregation is to stone him to death. <span class="verse">24:15</span> Moreover, you are to tell the Israelites, ‘If any man curses his God he will bear responsibility for his sin, <span class="verse">24:16</span> and one who misuses the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> must surely be put to death. The whole congregation must surely stone him, whether he is a resident foreigner or a native citizen; when he misuses the Name he must be put to death. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:17</span> “‘If a man beats any person to death, he must be put to death. <span class="verse">24:18</span> One who beats an animal to death must make restitution for it, life for life. <span class="verse">24:19</span> If a man inflicts an injury on his fellow citizen, just as he has done it must be done to him— <span class="verse">24:20</span> fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth—just as he inflicts an injury on another person that same injury must be inflicted on him. <span class="verse">24:21</span> One who beats an animal to death must make restitution for it, but one who beats a person to death must be put to death. <span class="verse">24:22</span> There will be one regulation for you, whether a resident foreigner or a native citizen, for I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:23</span> Then Moses spoke to the Israelites and they brought the one who cursed outside the camp and stoned him with stones. So the Israelites did just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded Moses. </p>

</body>
</html>