<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judah’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> The descendants of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:2</span> Reaiah the son of Shobal was the father of Jahath, and Jahath was the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These were the clans of the Zorathites. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:3</span> These were the sons of Etam: Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash. Their sister was Hazzelelponi. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Penuel was the father of Gedor, and Ezer was the father of Hushah. These were the descendants of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah and the father of Bethlehem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:5</span> Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah. <span class="verse">4:6</span> Naarah bore him Ahuzzam, Hepher, Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah. <span class="verse">4:7</span> The sons of Helah: Zereth, Zohar, Ethnan, <span class="verse">4:8</span> and Koz, who was the father of Anub, Hazzobebah, and the clans of Aharhel the son of Harum. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:9</span> Jabez was more respected than his brothers. His mother had named him Jabez, for she said, “I experienced pain when I gave birth to him.” <span class="verse">4:10</span> Jabez called out to the God of Israel, “If only you would greatly bless me and expand my territory. May your hand be with me! Keep me from harm so I might not endure pain.” God answered his prayer. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Kelub, the brother of Shuhah, was the father of Mehir, who was the father of Eshton. <span class="verse">4:12</span> Eshton was the father of Beth Rapha, Paseah, and Tehinnah, the father of Ir Nahash. These were the men of Recah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> The sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Othniel: Hathath and Meonothai. <span class="verse">4:14</span> Meonothai was the father of Ophrah.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Seraiah was the father of Joab, the father of those who live in the Valley of the Craftsmen, for they were craftsmen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:15</span> The sons of Caleb son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The son of Elah: Kenaz. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:16</span> The sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:17</span> The sons of Ezrah: Jether, Mered, Epher, and Jalon.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Mered’s wife Bithiah gave birth to Miriam, Shammai, and Ishbah, the father of Eshtemoa. <span class="verse">4:18</span> (His Judahite wife gave birth to Jered the father of Gedor, Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah.) These were the sons of Pharaoh’s daughter Bithiah, whom Mered married. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:19</span> The sons of Hodiah’s wife, the sister of Naham: the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:20</span> The sons of Shimon: Amnon, Rinnah, Ben Hanan, and Tilon.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The descendants of Ishi: Zoheth and Ben Zoheth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:21</span> The sons of Shelah son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah, Laadah the father of Mareshah, the clans of the linen workers at Beth Ashbea, <span class="verse">4:22</span> Jokim, the men of Cozeba, and Joash and Saraph, both of whom ruled in Moab and Jashubi Lehem. (This information is from ancient records.) <span class="verse">4:23</span> They were the potters who lived in Netaim and Gederah; they lived there and worked for the king. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Simeon’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:24</span> The descendants of Simeon: Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul, <span class="verse">4:25</span> his son Shallum, his son Mibsam, and his son Mishma. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:26</span> The descendants of Mishma: his son Hammuel, his son Zaccur, and his son Shimei. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:27</span> Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters. But his brothers did not have many sons, so their whole clan was not as numerous as the sons of Judah. <span class="verse">4:28</span> They lived in Beer Sheba, Moladah, Hazar Shual, <span class="verse">4:29</span> Bilhah, Ezem, Tolad, <span class="verse">4:30</span> Bethuel, Hormah, Ziklag, <span class="verse">4:31</span> Beth Marcaboth, Hazar Susim, Beth Biri, and Shaaraim. These were their towns until the reign of David. <span class="verse">4:32</span> Their settlements also included Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, and Ashan—five towns, <span class="verse">4:33</span> along with all their settlements that surrounded these towns as far as Baal. These were the places where they lived; they kept genealogical records. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:34</span> Their clan leaders were: Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah son of Amaziah, <span class="verse">4:35</span> Joel, Jehu son of Joshibiah (son of Seraiah, son of Asiel), <span class="verse">4:36</span> Eleoenai, Jaakobah, Jeshohaiah, Asaiah, Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah, <span class="verse">4:37</span> Ziza son of Shipi (son of Allon, son of Jedaiah, son of Shimri, son of Shemaiah). <span class="verse">4:38</span> These who are named above were the leaders of their clans. </p>
<p class="bodytext">Their extended families increased greatly in numbers. <span class="verse">4:39</span> They went to the entrance of Gedor, to the east of the valley, looking for pasture for their sheep. <span class="verse">4:40</span> They found fertile and rich pasture; the land was very broad, undisturbed and peaceful. Indeed some Hamites had been living there before that. <span class="verse">4:41</span> The men whose names are listed came during the time of King Hezekiah of Judah and attacked the Hamites’ settlements, as well as the Meunites they discovered there, and they wiped them out, as can be seen to this very day. They dispossessed them, for they found pasture for their sheep there. <span class="verse">4:42</span> Five hundred men of Simeon, led by Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, went to the hill country of Seir <span class="verse">4:43</span> and defeated the rest of the Amalekite refugees; they live there to this very day. </p>

</body>
</html>