<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zechariah 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Vision Eight: The Chariots</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Once more I looked, and this time I saw four chariots emerging from between two mountains of bronze. <span class="verse">6:2</span> Harnessed to the first chariot were red horses, to the second black horses, <span class="verse">6:3</span> to the third white horses, and to the fourth spotted horses, all of them strong. <span class="verse">6:4</span> Then I asked the angelic messenger who was speaking with me, “What are these, sir?” <span class="verse">6:5</span> The messenger replied, “These are the four spirits of heaven going out after presenting themselves before the Lord of all the earth. <span class="verse">6:6</span> The chariot with the black horses is going to the north country, and the white ones are going after them, but the spotted ones are going to the south country. <span class="verse">6:7</span> All these strong ones are scattering; they have sought permission to go and walk about over the earth.” The Lord had said, “Go! Walk about over the earth!” So they are doing so. <span class="verse">6:8</span> Then he cried out to me, “Look! The ones going to the northland have brought me peace about the northland.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Concluding Oracle</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:9</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message came to me as follows: <span class="verse">6:10</span> “Choose some people from among the exiles, namely, Heldai, Tobijah, and Jedaiah, all who have come from Babylon, and when you have done so go to the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah. <span class="verse">6:11</span> Then take some silver and gold to make a crown and set it on the head of Joshua the high priest, the son of Jehozadak. <span class="verse">6:12</span> Then say to him, ‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says, “Look—here is the man whose name is Branch, who will sprout up from his place and build the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">6:13</span> Indeed, he will build the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and he will be clothed in splendor, sitting as king on his throne. Moreover, there will be a priest with him on his throne and they will see eye to eye on everything. <span class="verse">6:14</span> The crown will then be turned over to Helem, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and Hen son of Zephaniah as a memorial in the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">6:15</span> Then those who are far away will come and build the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> so that you may know that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has sent me to you. This will all come to pass if you completely obey the voice of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God.”’” </p>

</body>
</html>