<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Uzzah Meets Disaster </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> David consulted with his military officers, including those who led groups of a thousand and those who led groups of a hundred. <span class="verse">13:2</span> David said to the whole Israelite assembly, “If you so desire and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God approves, let’s spread the word to our brothers who remain in all the regions of Israel, and to the priests and Levites in their cities, so they may join us. <span class="verse">13:3</span> Let’s move the ark of our God back here, for we did not seek his will throughout Saul’s reign.” <span class="verse">13:4</span> The whole assembly agreed to do this, for the proposal seemed right to all the people. <span class="verse">13:5</span> So David assembled all Israel from the Shihor River in Egypt to Lebo Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath Jearim. <span class="verse">13:6</span> David and all Israel went up to Baalah (that is, Kiriath Jearim) in Judah to bring up from there the ark of God the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, who sits enthroned between the cherubim—the ark that is called by his Name. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:7</span> They transported the ark of God on a new cart from the house of Abinadab; Uzzah and Ahio were guiding the cart, <span class="verse">13:8</span> while David and all Israel were energetically celebrating before God, singing and playing various stringed instruments, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets. <span class="verse">13:9</span> When they arrived at the threshing floor of Kidon, Uzzah reached out his hand to take hold of the ark, because the oxen stumbled. <span class="verse">13:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was so furious with Uzzah, he killed him, because he reached out his hand and touched the ark. He died right there before God. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:11</span> David was angry because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> attacked Uzzah; so he called that place Perez Uzzah, which remains its name to this very day. <span class="verse">13:12</span> David was afraid of God that day and said, “How will I ever be able to bring the ark of God up here?” <span class="verse">13:13</span> So David did not move the ark to the City of David; he left it in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite. <span class="verse">13:14</span> The ark of God remained in Obed-Edom’s house for three months; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> blessed Obed-Edom’s family and everything that belonged to him.</p>

</body>
</html>