<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hebrews 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warning Against Drifting Away</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Therefore we must pay closer attention to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away. <span class="verse">2:2</span> For if the message spoken through angels proved to be so firm that every violation or disobedience received its just penalty, <span class="verse">2:3</span> how will we escape if we neglect such a great salvation? It was first communicated through the Lord and was confirmed to us by those who heard him, <span class="verse">2:4</span> while God confirmed their witness with signs and wonders and various miracles and gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to his will. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exposition of Psalm 8: Jesus and the Destiny of Humanity</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:5</span> For he did not put the world to come, about which we are speaking, under the control of angels. <span class="verse">2:6</span> Instead someone testified somewhere: </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<b><i>What is man that you think of him</i></b> <b><i>or</i> <i>the son of man that you care for him?</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> <i><b>You made him lower than the angels for a little while</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>You crowned him with glory and honor</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> <i><b>You put all things under his control</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext">For when he <b><i>put</i></b> <b><i>all things under his control</i></b>, he left nothing outside of his control. At present we do not yet see <b><i>all things under his control</i></b>, <span class="verse">2:9</span> but we see Jesus, who was made <b><i>lower than the angels for a little while</i></b>, now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death, so that by God’s grace he would experience death on behalf of everyone. <span class="verse">2:10</span> For it was fitting for him, for whom and through whom all things exist, in bringing many sons to glory, to make the pioneer of their salvation perfect through sufferings. <span class="verse">2:11</span> For indeed he who makes holy and those being made holy all have the same origin, and so he is not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters, <span class="verse">2:12</span> saying, “<b><i>I will proclaim your name to my brothers;</i></b> <b><i>in</i> <i>the midst of the assembly I will praise you</i></b>.” <span class="verse">2:13</span> Again he says, “I will be confident in him,” and again, “<i><b>Here I am</b>,</i> <b><i>with</i></b> <b><i>the children God has given me</i></b>.” <span class="verse">2:14</span> Therefore, since the children share in flesh and blood, he likewise shared in their humanity, so that through death he could destroy the one who holds the power of death (that is, the devil), <span class="verse">2:15</span> and set free those who were held in slavery all their lives by their fear of death. <span class="verse">2:16</span> For surely his concern is not for angels, but he is concerned for Abraham’s descendants. <span class="verse">2:17</span> Therefore he had to be made like his brothers and sisters in every respect, so that he could become a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God, to make atonement for the sins of the people. <span class="verse">2:18</span> For since he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted. </p>

</body>
</html>