<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 44</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 44</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, by the Korahites; a well-written song. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:1</span> O God, we have clearly heard; </p>
<p class="poetry">our ancestors have told us</p>
<p class="poetry">what you did in their days,</p>
<p class="poetry">in ancient times. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:2</span> You, by your power, defeated nations and settled our fathers on their land; </p>
<p class="poetry">you crushed the people living there and enabled our ancestors to occupy it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:3</span> For they did not conquer the land by their swords,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they did not prevail by their strength, </p>
<p class="poetry">but rather by your power, strength, and good favor, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you were partial to them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:4</span> You are my king, O God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Decree Jacob’s deliverance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:5</span> By your power we will drive back our enemies;</p>
<p class="poetry">by your strength we will trample down our foes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:6</span> For I do not trust in my bow,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I do not prevail by my sword. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:7</span> For you deliver us from our enemies;</p>
<p class="poetry">you humiliate those who hate us.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:8</span> In God we boast all day long,</p>
<p class="poetry">and we will continually give thanks to your name. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:9</span> But you rejected and embarrassed us.</p>
<p class="poetry">You did not go into battle with our armies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:10</span> You made us retreat from the enemy.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who hate us take whatever they want from us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:11</span> You handed us over like sheep to be eaten;</p>
<p class="poetry">you scattered us among the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:12</span> You sold your people for a pittance; </p>
<p class="poetry">you did not ask a high price for them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:13</span> You made us an object of disdain to our neighbors;</p>
<p class="poetry">those who live on our borders taunt and insult us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:14</span> You made us an object of ridicule among the nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">foreigners treat us with contempt. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:15</span> All day long I feel humiliated </p>
<p class="poetry">and am overwhelmed with shame, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:16</span> before the vindictive enemy</p>
<p class="poetry">who ridicules and insults me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:17</span> All this has happened to us, even though we have not rejected you </p>
<p class="poetry">or violated your covenant with us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:18</span> We have not been unfaithful, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor have we disobeyed your commands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:19</span> Yet you have battered us, leaving us a heap of ruins overrun by wild dogs; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have covered us with darkness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:20</span> If we had rejected our God, </p>
<p class="poetry">and spread out our hands in prayer to another god, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:21</span> would not God discover it,</p>
<p class="poetry">for he knows a person’s secret thoughts? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:22</span> Yet because of you we are killed all day long;</p>
<p class="poetry">we are treated like sheep at the slaughtering block. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:23</span> Rouse yourself! Why do you sleep, O Lord?</p>
<p class="poetry">Wake up! Do not reject us forever. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:24</span> Why do you look the other way, </p>
<p class="poetry">and ignore the way we are oppressed and mistreated? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:25</span> For we lie in the dirt,</p>
<p class="poetry">with our bellies pressed to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">44:26</span> Rise up and help us.</p>
<p class="poetry">Rescue us because of your loyal love. </p>

</body>
</html>