<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Romans 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul, a slave of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God. <span class="verse">1:2</span> This gospel he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy scriptures, <span class="verse">1:3</span> concerning his Son who was a descendant of David with reference to the flesh, <span class="verse">1:4</span> who was appointed the Son-of-God-in-power according to the Holy Spirit by the resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord. <span class="verse">1:5</span> Through him we have received grace and our apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith among all the Gentiles on behalf of his name. <span class="verse">1:6</span> You also are among them, called to belong to Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">1:7</span> To all those loved by God in Rome, called to be saints: Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Desire to Visit Rome</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:8</span> First of all, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world. <span class="verse">1:9</span> For God, whom I serve in my spirit in the gospel of his Son, is my witness that I continually remember you <span class="verse">1:10</span> and I always ask in my prayers, if perhaps now at last I may succeed in visiting you according to the will of God. <span class="verse">1:11</span> For I long to see you, so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to strengthen you, <span class="verse">1:12</span> that is, that we may be mutually comforted by one another’s faith, both yours and mine. <span class="verse">1:13</span> I do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, that I often intended to come to you (and was prevented until now), so that I may have some fruit even among you, just as I already have among the rest of the Gentiles. <span class="verse">1:14</span> I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish. <span class="verse">1:15</span> Thus I am eager also to preach the gospel to you who are in Rome. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Power of the Gospel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is God’s power for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and also to the Greek. <span class="verse">1:17</span> For the righteousness of God is revealed in the gospel from faith to faith, just as it is written, “<b><i>The righteous by faith will live</i></b>.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condemnation of the Unrighteous</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:18</span> For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of people who suppress the truth by their unrighteousness, <span class="verse">1:19</span> because what can be known about God is plain to them, because God has made it plain to them. <span class="verse">1:20</span> For since the creation of the world his invisible attributes—his eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen, because they are understood through what has been made. So people are without excuse. <span class="verse">1:21</span> For although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God or give him thanks, but they became futile in their thoughts and their senseless hearts were darkened. <span class="verse">1:22</span> Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools <span class="verse">1:23</span> and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for an image resembling mortal human beings or birds or four-footed animals or reptiles. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:24</span> Therefore God gave them over in the desires of their hearts to impurity, to dishonor their bodies among themselves. <span class="verse">1:25</span> They exchanged the truth of God for a lie and worshiped and served the creation rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever! Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:26</span> For this reason God gave them over to dishonorable passions. For their women exchanged the natural sexual relations for unnatural ones, <span class="verse">1:27</span> and likewise the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed in their passions for one another. Men committed shameless acts with men and received in themselves the due penalty for their error. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:28</span> And just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them over to a depraved mind, to do what should not be done. <span class="verse">1:29</span> They are filled with every kind of unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, malice. They are rife with envy, murder, strife, deceit, hostility. They are gossips, <span class="verse">1:30</span> slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boastful, contrivers of all sorts of evil, disobedient to parents, <span class="verse">1:31</span> senseless, covenant-breakers, heartless, ruthless. <span class="verse">1:32</span> Although they fully know God’s righteous decree that those who practice such things deserve to die, they not only do them but also approve of those who practice them. </p>

</body>
</html>