<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 33</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 33</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wanderings from Egypt to Sinai</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:1</span>  These are the journeys of the Israelites, who went out of the land of Egypt by their divisions under the authority of Moses and Aaron. <span class="verse">33:2</span> Moses recorded their departures according to their journeys, by the commandment of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; now these are their journeys according to their departures. <span class="verse">33:3</span> They departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the day after the Passover the Israelites went out defiantly in plain sight of all the Egyptians. <span class="verse">33:4</span> Now the Egyptians were burying all their firstborn, whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had killed among them; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> also executed judgments on their gods. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:5</span> The Israelites traveled from Rameses and camped in Sukkoth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:6</span> They traveled from Sukkoth, and camped in Etham, which is on the edge of the desert. <span class="verse">33:7</span> They traveled from Etham, and turned again to Pi Hahiroth, which is before Baal Zephon; and they camped before Migdal. <span class="verse">33:8</span> They traveled from Pi Hahiroth, and passed through the middle of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days’ journey in the wilderness of Etham, and camped in Marah. <span class="verse">33:9</span> They traveled from Marah and came to Elim; in Elim there are twelve fountains of water and seventy palm trees, so they camped there. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:10</span> They traveled from Elim, and camped by the Red Sea. <span class="verse">33:11</span> They traveled from the Red Sea and camped in the wilderness of Sin. <span class="verse">33:12</span> They traveled from the wilderness of Sin and camped in Dophkah. <span class="verse">33:13</span> And they traveled from Dophkah, and camped in Alush. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:14</span> They traveled from Alush and camped at Rephidim, where there was no water for the people to drink. <span class="verse">33:15</span> They traveled from Rephidim and camped in the desert of Sinai. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wanderings in the Wilderness</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:16</span> They traveled from the desert of Sinai and camped at Kibroth Hattaavah. <span class="verse">33:17</span> They traveled from Kibroth Hattaavah and camped at Hazeroth. <span class="verse">33:18</span> They traveled from Hazeroth and camped in Rithmah. <span class="verse">33:19</span> They traveled from Rithmah and camped at Rimmon Perez. <span class="verse">33:20</span> They traveled from Rimmon Perez and camped in Libnah. <span class="verse">33:21</span> They traveled from Libnah and camped at Rissah. <span class="verse">33:22</span> They traveled from Rissah and camped in Kehelathah. <span class="verse">33:23</span> They traveled from Kehelathah and camped at Mount Shepher. <span class="verse">33:24</span> They traveled from Mount Shepher and camped in Haradah. <span class="verse">33:25</span> They traveled from Haradah and camped in Makheloth. <span class="verse">33:26</span> They traveled from Makheloth and camped at Tahath. <span class="verse">33:27</span> They traveled from Tahath and camped at Terah. <span class="verse">33:28</span> They traveled from Terah and camped in Mithcah. <span class="verse">33:29</span> They traveled from Mithcah and camped in Hashmonah. <span class="verse">33:30</span> They traveled from Hashmonah and camped in Moseroth. <span class="verse">33:31</span> They traveled from Moseroth and camped in Bene Jaakan. <span class="verse">33:32</span> They traveled from Bene Jaakan and camped at Hor Haggidgad. <span class="verse">33:33</span> They traveled from Hor Haggidgad and camped in Jotbathah. <span class="verse">33:34</span> They traveled from Jotbathah and camped in Abronah. <span class="verse">33:35</span> They traveled from Abronah and camped at Ezion Geber. <span class="verse">33:36</span> They traveled from Ezion Geber and camped in the wilderness of Zin, that is, Kadesh. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wanderings from Kadesh to Moab</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:37</span> They traveled from Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor at the edge of the land of Edom. <span class="verse">33:38</span> Aaron the priest ascended Mount Hor at the command of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and he died there in the fortieth year after the Israelites had come out of the land of Egypt on the first day of the fifth month. <span class="verse">33:39</span> Now Aaron was 123 years old when he died on Mount Hor. <span class="verse">33:40</span> The king of Arad, the Canaanite king who lived in the south of the land of Canaan, heard about the approach of the Israelites. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:41</span> They traveled from Mount Hor and camped in Zalmonah. <span class="verse">33:42</span> They traveled from Zalmonah and camped in Punon. <span class="verse">33:43</span> They traveled from Punon and camped in Oboth. <span class="verse">33:44</span> They traveled from Oboth and camped in Iye Abarim, on the border of Moab. <span class="verse">33:45</span> They traveled from Iim and camped in Dibon Gad. <span class="verse">33:46</span> They traveled from Dibon Gad and camped in Almon Diblathaim. <span class="verse">33:47</span> They traveled from Almon Diblathaim and camped in the mountains of Abarim before Nebo. <span class="verse">33:48</span> They traveled from the mountains of Abarim and camped in the rift valley plains by Moab along the Jordan River across from Jericho. <span class="verse">33:49</span> They camped by the Jordan, from Beth Jeshimoth as far as Abel Shittim in the rift valley plains of Moab. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">At the Border of Canaan</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">33:50</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses in the rift valley plains of Moab along the Jordan, across from Jericho. He said: <span class="verse">33:51</span> “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you have crossed the Jordan into the land of Canaan, <span class="verse">33:52</span> you must drive out all the inhabitants of the land before you. Destroy all their carved images, all their molten images, and demolish their high places. <span class="verse">33:53</span> You must dispossess the inhabitants of the land and live in it, for I have given you the land to possess it. <span class="verse">33:54</span> You must divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families. To a larger group you must give a larger inheritance, and to a smaller group you must give a smaller inheritance. Everyone’s inheritance must be in the place where his lot falls. You must inherit according to your ancestral tribes. <span class="verse">33:55</span> But if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land before you, then those whom you allow to remain will be irritants in your eyes and thorns in your side, and will cause you trouble in the land where you will be living. <span class="verse">33:56</span> And what I intended to do to them I will do to you.’”</p>

</body>
</html>