<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 30</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 30</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction to the Book of Consolation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Jeremiah. <span class="verse">30:2</span> “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel says, ‘Write everything that I am about to tell you in a scroll. <span class="verse">30:3</span> For I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, affirm that the time will come when I will reverse the plight of my people, Israel and Judah,’ says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. ‘I will bring them back to the land I gave their ancestors and they will take possession of it once again.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel and Judah Will Be Delivered after a Time of Deep Distress</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:4</span> So here is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has to say about Israel and Judah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:5</span> Yes, here is what he says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“You hear cries of panic and of terror;</p>
<p class="poetry">there is no peace in sight. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:6</span> Ask yourselves this and consider it carefully: </p>
<p class="poetry">Have you ever seen a man give birth to a baby?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why then do I see all these strong men</p>
<p class="poetry">grabbing their stomachs in pain like a woman giving birth?</p>
<p class="poetry">And why do their faces</p>
<p class="poetry">turn so deathly pale? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:7</span> Alas, what a terrible time of trouble it is! </p>
<p class="poetry">There has never been any like it.</p>
<p class="poetry">It is a time of trouble for the descendants of Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">but some of them will be rescued out of it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:8</span> When the time for them to be rescued comes,” </p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I will rescue you from foreign subjugation. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will deliver you from captivity. </p>
<p class="poetry">Foreigners will then no longer subjugate them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:9</span> But they will be subject to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the Davidic ruler whom I will raise up as king over them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:10</span> So I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, tell you not to be afraid, </p>
<p class="poetry">you descendants of Jacob, my servants. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not be terrified, people of Israel.</p>
<p class="poetry">For I will rescue you and your descendants</p>
<p class="poetry">from a faraway land where you are captives. </p>
<p class="poetry">The descendants of Jacob will return to their land and enjoy peace.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will be secure and no one will terrify them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:11</span> For I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, affirm that </p>
<p class="poetry">I will be with you and will rescue you.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will completely destroy all the nations where I scattered you.</p>
<p class="poetry">But I will not completely destroy you.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will indeed discipline you, but only in due measure.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will not allow you to go entirely unpunished.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Heal the Wounds of Judah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:12</span> Moreover, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says to the people of Zion: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Your injuries are incurable;</p>
<p class="poetry">your wounds are severe. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:13</span> There is no one to plead your cause.</p>
<p class="poetry">There are no remedies for your wounds. </p>
<p class="poetry">There is no healing for you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:14</span> All your allies have abandoned you. </p>
<p class="poetry">They no longer have any concern for you.</p>
<p class="poetry">For I have attacked you like an enemy would.</p>
<p class="poetry">I have chastened you cruelly.</p>
<p class="poetry">For your wickedness is so great</p>
<p class="poetry">and your sin is so much. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:15</span> Why do you complain about your injuries,</p>
<p class="poetry">that your pain is incurable?</p>
<p class="poetry">I have done all this to you</p>
<p class="poetry">because your wickedness is so great</p>
<p class="poetry">and your sin is so much. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:16</span> But all who destroyed you will be destroyed.</p>
<p class="poetry">All your enemies will go into exile.</p>
<p class="poetry">Those who plundered you will be plundered.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will cause those who pillaged you to be pillaged. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:17</span> Yes, I will restore you to health.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will heal your wounds.</p>
<p class="poetry">I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, affirm it! </p>
<p class="poetry">For you have been called an outcast,</p>
<p class="poetry">Zion, whom no one cares for.”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Restore Israel and Judah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">30:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will restore the ruined houses of the descendants of Jacob.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will show compassion on their ruined homes. </p>
<p class="poetry">Every city will be rebuilt on its former ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry">Every fortified dwelling will occupy its traditional site. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:19</span> Out of those places you will hear songs of thanksgiving </p>
<p class="poetry">and the sounds of laughter and merriment.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will increase their number and they will not dwindle away. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will bring them honor and they will no longer be despised. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:20</span> The descendants of Jacob will enjoy their former privileges.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their community will be reestablished in my favor, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I will punish all who try to oppress them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:21</span> One of their own people will be their leader.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their ruler will come from their own number. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will invite him to approach me, and he will do so. </p>
<p class="poetry">For no one would dare approach me on his own. </p>
<p class="poetry">I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, affirm it! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:22</span> Then you will again be my people,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I will be your God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:23</span> Just watch! The wrath of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">will come like a storm.</p>
<p class="poetry">Like a raging storm it will rage down </p>
<p class="poetry">on the heads of those who are wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">30:24</span> The anger of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will not turn back</p>
<p class="poetry">until he has fully carried out his intended purposes.</p>
<p class="poetry">In future days you will come to understand this. </p>

</body>
</html>