<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Eliphaz’s Second Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:2</span> “Does a wise man answer with blustery knowledge, </p>
<p class="poetry">or fill his belly with the east wind? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:3</span> Does he argue with useless talk,</p>
<p class="poetry">with words that have no value in them?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:4</span> But you even break off piety, </p>
<p class="poetry">and hinder meditation before God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:5</span> Your sin inspires your mouth;</p>
<p class="poetry">you choose the language of the crafty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:6</span> Your own mouth condemns you, not I;</p>
<p class="poetry">your own lips testify against you.</p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">15:7</span> “Were you the first man ever born?</p>
<p class="poetry">Were you brought forth before the hills? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:8</span> Do you listen in on God’s secret council? </p>
<p class="poetry">Do you limit wisdom to yourself?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:9</span> What do you know that we don’t know?</p>
<p class="poetry">What do you understand that we don’t understand? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:10</span> The gray-haired and the aged are on our side, </p>
<p class="poetry">men far older than your father. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:11</span> Are God’s consolations too trivial for you, </p>
<p class="poetry">or a word spoken in gentleness to you?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:12</span> Why has your heart carried you away, </p>
<p class="poetry">and why do your eyes flash, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:13</span> when you turn your rage against God</p>
<p class="poetry">and allow such words to escape from your mouth? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:14</span> What is man that he should be pure,</p>
<p class="poetry">or one born of woman, that he should be righteous? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:15</span> If God places no trust in his holy ones, </p>
<p class="poetry">if even the heavens are not pure in his eyes, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:16</span> how much less man, who is abominable and corrupt, </p>
<p class="poetry">who drinks in evil like water! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:17</span> “I will explain to you; </p>
<p class="poetry">listen to me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and what I have seen, I will declare, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:18</span> what wise men declare,</p>
<p class="poetry">hiding nothing, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the tradition of their ancestors, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:19</span> to whom alone the land was given</p>
<p class="poetry">when no foreigner passed among them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:20</span> All his days the wicked man suffers torment, </p>
<p class="poetry">throughout the number of the years </p>
<p class="poetry">that are stored up for the tyrant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:21</span> Terrifying sounds fill his ears;</p>
<p class="poetry">in a time of peace marauders attack him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:22</span> He does not expect to escape from darkness; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is marked for the sword; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:23</span> he wanders about—food for vultures — </p>
<p class="poetry">he knows that the day of darkness is at hand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:24</span> Distress and anguish terrify him;</p>
<p class="poetry">they prevail against him </p>
<p class="poetry">like a king ready to launch an attack, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:25</span> for he stretches out his hand against God, </p>
<p class="poetry">and vaunts himself against the Almighty, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:26</span> defiantly charging against him </p>
<p class="poetry">with a thick, strong shield! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:27</span> Because he covered his face with fat, </p>
<p class="poetry">and made his hips bulge with fat, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:28</span> he lived in ruined towns </p>
<p class="poetry">and in houses where no one lives,</p>
<p class="poetry">where they are ready to crumble into heaps. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:29</span> He will not grow rich,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his wealth will not endure,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor will his possessions spread over the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:30</span> He will not escape the darkness; </p>
<p class="poetry">a flame will wither his shoots</p>
<p class="poetry">and he will depart </p>
<p class="poetry">by the breath of God’s mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:31</span> Let him not trust in what is worthless, </p>
<p class="poetry">deceiving himself;</p>
<p class="poetry">for worthlessness will be his reward. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:32</span> Before his time he will be paid in full, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his branches will not flourish. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:33</span> Like a vine he will let his sour grapes fall, </p>
<p class="poetry">and like an olive tree </p>
<p class="poetry">he will shed his blossoms. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:34</span> For the company of the godless is barren, </p>
<p class="poetry">and fire consumes the tents of those who accept bribes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">15:35</span> They conceive trouble and bring forth evil;</p>
<p class="poetry">their belly prepares deception.” </p>

</body>
</html>