<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Seventy Years of Servitude for Failure to Give Heed</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span> In the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah. (That was the same as the first year that Nebuchadnezzar was king of Babylon.) <span class="verse">25:2</span> So the prophet Jeremiah spoke to all the people of Judah and to all the people who were living in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">25:3</span> “For the last twenty-three years, from the thirteenth year that Josiah son of Amon was ruling in Judah until now, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s messages have come to me and I have told them to you over and over again. But you would not listen. <span class="verse">25:4</span> Over and over again the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has sent his servants the prophets to you. But you have not listened or paid attention. <span class="verse">25:5</span> He said through them, ‘Each of you must turn from your wicked ways and stop doing the evil things you are doing. If you do, I will allow you to continue to live here in the land that I gave to you and your ancestors as a lasting possession. <span class="verse">25:6</span> Do not pay allegiance to other gods and worship and serve them. Do not make me angry by the things that you do. Then I will not cause you any harm.’ <span class="verse">25:7</span> So, now the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, ‘You have not listened to me. But you have made me angry by the things that you have done. Thus you have brought harm on yourselves.’</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:8</span> “Therefore, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says, ‘You have not listened to what I said. <span class="verse">25:9</span> So I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, affirm that I will send for all the peoples of the north and my servant, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. I will bring them against this land and its inhabitants and all the nations that surround it. I will utterly destroy the land, its inhabitants, and all the surrounding nations and make them everlasting ruins. I will make them objects of horror and hissing scorn. <span class="verse">25:10</span> I will put an end to the sounds of joy and gladness and the glad celebration of brides and grooms in these lands. I will put an end to the sound of people grinding meal. I will put an end to lamps shining in their houses. <span class="verse">25:11</span> This whole area will become a desolate wasteland. These nations will be subject to the king of Babylon for seventy years.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:12</span> “‘But when the seventy years are over, I will punish the king of Babylon and his nation for their sins. I will make the land of Babylon an everlasting ruin. I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, affirm it! <span class="verse">25:13</span> I will bring on that land everything that I said I would. I will bring on it everything that is written in this book. I will bring on it everything that Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations. <span class="verse">25:14</span> For many nations and great kings will make slaves of the king of Babylon and his nation too. I will repay them for all they have done.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judah and the Nations Will Experience God’s Wrath</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:15</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the God of Israel, spoke to me in a vision: “Take this cup from my hand. It is filled with the wine of my wrath. Take it and make the nations to whom I send you drink it. <span class="verse">25:16</span> When they have drunk it, they will stagger to and fro and act insane. For I will send wars sweeping through them.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:17</span> So I took the cup from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s hand. I made all the nations to whom he sent me drink the wine of his wrath. <span class="verse">25:18</span> I made Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, its kings and its officials drink it. I did it so Judah would become a ruin. I did it so Judah, its kings, and its officials would become an object of horror and of hissing scorn, an example used in curses. Such is already becoming the case! <span class="verse">25:19</span> I made all these other people drink it: Pharaoh, king of Egypt; his attendants, his officials, his people, <span class="verse">25:20</span> the foreigners living in Egypt; all the kings of the land of Uz; all the kings of the land of the Philistines, the people of Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, the people who had been left alive from Ashdod; <span class="verse">25:21</span> all the people of Edom, Moab, Ammon; <span class="verse">25:22</span> all the kings of Tyre, all the kings of Sidon; all the kings of the coastlands along the sea; <span class="verse">25:23</span> the people of Dedan, Tema, Buz, all the desert people who cut their hair short at the temples; <span class="verse">25:24</span> all the kings of Arabia who live in the desert; <span class="verse">25:25</span> all the kings of Zimri; all the kings of Elam; all the kings of Media; <span class="verse">25:26</span> all the kings of the north, whether near or far from one another; and all the other kingdoms that are on the face of the earth. After all of them have drunk the wine of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s wrath, the king of Babylon must drink it.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:27</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to me, “Tell them that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Drink this cup until you get drunk and vomit. Drink until you fall down and can’t get up. For I will send wars sweeping through you.’ <span class="verse">25:28</span> If they refuse to take the cup from your hand and drink it, tell them that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says, ‘You most certainly must drink it! <span class="verse">25:29</span> For take note, I am already beginning to bring disaster on the city that I call my own. So how can you possibly avoid being punished? You will not go unpunished. For I am proclaiming war against all who live on the earth. I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, affirm it!’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:30</span> “Then, Jeremiah, make the following prophecy against them: </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Like a lion about to attack, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will roar from the heights of heaven;</p>
<p class="poetry">from his holy dwelling on high he will roar loudly.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will roar mightily against his land. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will shout in triumph, like those stomping juice from the grapes, </p>
<p class="poetry">against all those who live on the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:31</span> The sounds of battle will resound to the ends of the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will bring charges against the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will pass judgment on all humankind</p>
<p class="poetry">and will hand the wicked over to be killed in war.’ </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> so affirms it! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:32</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Disaster will soon come on one nation after another. </p>
<p class="poetry">A mighty storm of military destruction is rising up</p>
<p class="poetry">from the distant parts of the earth.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:33</span> Those who have been killed by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at that time </p>
<p class="poetry">will be scattered from one end of the earth to the other. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will not be mourned over, gathered up, or buried. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their dead bodies will lie scattered over the ground like manure. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:34</span> Wail and cry out in anguish, you rulers!</p>
<p class="poetry">Roll in the dust, you who shepherd flocks of people! </p>
<p class="poetry">The time for you to be slaughtered has come.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will lie scattered and fallen like broken pieces of fine pottery. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:35</span> The leaders will not be able to run away and hide. </p>
<p class="poetry">The shepherds of the flocks will not be able to escape. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:36</span> Listen to the cries of anguish of the leaders.</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen to the wails of the shepherds of the flocks.</p>
<p class="poetry">They are wailing because the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">is about to destroy their lands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:37</span> Their peaceful dwelling places will be laid waste </p>
<p class="poetry">by the fierce anger of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">25:38</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is like a lion who has left his lair. </p>
<p class="poetry">So their lands will certainly be laid waste</p>
<p class="poetry">by the warfare of the oppressive nation </p>
<p class="poetry">and by the fierce anger of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>

</body>
</html>