<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 77</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 77</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, Jeduthun; a psalm of Asaph.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:1</span> I will cry out to God and call for help.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will cry out to God and he will pay attention to me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:2</span> In my time of trouble I sought the Lord.</p>
<p class="poetry">I kept my hand raised in prayer throughout the night. </p>
<p class="poetry">I refused to be comforted. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:3</span> I said, “I will remember God while I groan;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will think about him while my strength leaves me.” (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:4</span> You held my eyelids open; </p>
<p class="poetry">I was troubled and could not speak. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:5</span> I thought about the days of old,</p>
<p class="poetry">about ancient times. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:6</span> I said, “During the night I will remember the song I once sang;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will think very carefully.”</p>
<p class="poetry">I tried to make sense of what was happening. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:7</span> I asked, “Will the Lord reject me forever?</p>
<p class="poetry">Will he never again show me his favor? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:8</span> Has his loyal love disappeared forever?</p>
<p class="poetry">Has his promise failed forever? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:9</span> Has God forgotten to be merciful?</p>
<p class="poetry">Has his anger stifled his compassion?” (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:10</span> Then I said, “I am sickened by the thought</p>
<p class="poetry">that the Most High might become inactive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:11</span> I will remember the works of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, I will remember the amazing things you did long ago. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:12</span> I will think about all you have done;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will reflect upon your deeds.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:13</span>  O God, your deeds are extraordinary. </p>
<p class="poetry">What god can compare to our great God? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:14</span> You are the God who does amazing things;</p>
<p class="poetry">you have revealed your strength among the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:15</span> You delivered your people by your strength —</p>
<p class="poetry">the children of Jacob and Joseph. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:16</span> The waters saw you, O God,</p>
<p class="poetry">the waters saw you and trembled. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, the depths of the sea shook with fear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:17</span> The clouds poured down rain; </p>
<p class="poetry">the skies thundered. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, your arrows flashed about.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:18</span> Your thunderous voice was heard in the wind;</p>
<p class="poetry">the lightning bolts lit up the world.</p>
<p class="poetry">The earth trembled and shook. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:19</span> You walked through the sea; </p>
<p class="poetry">you passed through the surging waters, </p>
<p class="poetry">but left no footprints. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">77:20</span> You led your people like a flock of sheep,</p>
<p class="poetry">by the hand of Moses and Aaron. </p>

</body>
</html>