<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:1</span> One dead fly makes the perfumer’s ointment give off a rancid stench, </p>
<p class="poetry">so a little folly can outweigh much wisdom. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom Can Be Nullified By the Caprice of Rulers</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:2</span> A wise person’s good sense protects him, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a fool’s lack of sense leaves him vulnerable. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:3</span> Even when a fool walks along the road he lacks sense, </p>
<p class="poetry">and shows everyone what a fool he is. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:4</span> If the anger of the ruler flares up against you, do not resign from your position, </p>
<p class="poetry">for a calm response can undo great offenses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:5</span> I have seen another misfortune on the earth: </p>
<p class="poetry">It is an error a ruler makes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:6</span> Fools are placed in many positions of authority, </p>
<p class="poetry">while wealthy men sit in lowly positions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:7</span> I have seen slaves on horseback</p>
<p class="poetry">and princes walking on foot like slaves. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Wisdom is Needed to Avert Dangers in Everyday Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:8</span> One who digs a pit may fall into it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and one who breaks through a wall may be bitten by a snake. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:9</span> One who quarries stones may be injured by them;</p>
<p class="poetry">one who splits logs may be endangered by them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:10</span> If an iron axhead is blunt and a workman does not sharpen its edge, </p>
<p class="poetry">he must exert a great deal of effort; </p>
<p class="poetry">so wisdom has the advantage of giving success.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:11</span> If the snake should bite before it is charmed, </p>
<p class="poetry">the snake charmer is in trouble. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Words and Works of Wise Men and Fools</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:12</span> The words of a wise person win him favor, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the words of a fool are self-destructive. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:13</span> At the beginning his words are foolish</p>
<p class="poetry">and at the end his talk is wicked madness, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:14</span> yet a fool keeps on babbling. </p>
<p class="poetry">No one knows what will happen;</p>
<p class="poetry">who can tell him what will happen in the future? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:15</span> The toil of a stupid fool wears him out, </p>
<p class="poetry">because he does not even know the way to the city. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Problem with Foolish Rulers</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:16</span> Woe to you, O land, when your king is childish, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your princes feast in the morning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:17</span> Blessed are you, O land, when your king is the son of nobility, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your princes feast at the proper time —with self-control and not in drunkenness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:18</span> Because of laziness the roof caves in,</p>
<p class="poetry">and because of idle hands the house leaks. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:19</span> Feasts are made for laughter,</p>
<p class="poetry">and wine makes life merry, </p>
<p class="poetry">but money is the answer for everything. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">10:20</span> Do not curse a king even in your thoughts,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not curse the rich while in your bedroom; </p>
<p class="poetry">for a bird might report what you are thinking, </p>
<p class="poetry">or some winged creature might repeat your words. </p>

</body>
</html>