<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Exodus 35</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Exodus<br />Chapter 35</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Sabbath Regulations</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:1</span> Moses assembled the whole community of the Israelites and said to them, “These are the things that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has commanded you to do. <span class="verse">35:2</span> In six days work may be done, but on the seventh day there must be a holy day for you, a Sabbath of complete rest to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Anyone who does work on it will be put to death. <span class="verse">35:3</span> You must not kindle a fire in any of your homes on the Sabbath day.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Willing Workers</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:4</span>  Moses spoke to the whole community of the Israelites, “This is the word that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has commanded: <span class="verse">35:5</span> ‘Take an offering for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Let everyone who has a willing heart bring an offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>: gold, silver, bronze; <span class="verse">35:6</span> blue, purple, and scarlet yarn; fine linen; goats’ hair; <span class="verse">35:7</span> ram skins dyed red; fine leather; acacia wood; <span class="verse">35:8</span> olive oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense; <span class="verse">35:9</span> onyx stones, and other gems for mounting on the ephod and the breastpiece. <span class="verse">35:10</span> Every skilled person among you is to come and make all that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has commanded: <span class="verse">35:11</span> the tabernacle with its tent, its covering, its clasps, its frames, its crossbars, its posts, and its bases; <span class="verse">35:12</span> the ark, with its poles, the atonement lid, and the special curtain that conceals it; <span class="verse">35:13</span> the table with its poles and all its vessels, and the Bread of the Presence; <span class="verse">35:14</span> the lampstand for the light and its accessories, its lamps, and oil for the light; <span class="verse">35:15</span> and the altar of incense with its poles, the anointing oil, and the fragrant incense; the hanging for the door at the entrance of the tabernacle; <span class="verse">35:16</span> the altar for the burnt offering with its bronze grating that is on it, its poles, and all its utensils; the large basin and its pedestal; <span class="verse">35:17</span> the hangings of the courtyard, its posts and its bases, and the curtain for the gateway to the courtyard; <span class="verse">35:18</span> tent pegs for the tabernacle and tent pegs for the courtyard and their ropes; <span class="verse">35:19</span> the woven garments for serving in the Holy Place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments for his sons to minister as priests.’”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:20</span> So the whole community of the Israelites went out from the presence of Moses. <span class="verse">35:21</span> Everyone whose heart stirred him to action and everyone whose spirit was willing came and brought the offering for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for the work of the tent of meeting, for all its service, and for the holy garments. <span class="verse">35:22</span> They came, men and women alike, all who had willing hearts. They brought brooches, earrings, rings and ornaments, all kinds of gold jewelry, and everyone came who waved a wave offering of gold to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:23</span> Everyone who had blue, purple, or scarlet yarn, fine linen, goats’ hair, ram skins dyed red, or fine leather brought them. <span class="verse">35:24</span> Everyone making an offering of silver or bronze brought it as an offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and everyone who had acacia wood for any work of the service brought it. <span class="verse">35:25</span> Every woman who was skilled spun with her hands and brought what she had spun, blue, purple, or scarlet yarn, or fine linen, <span class="verse">35:26</span> and all the women whose heart stirred them to action and who were skilled spun goats’ hair.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:27</span> The leaders brought onyx stones and other gems to be mounted for the ephod and the breastpiece, <span class="verse">35:28</span> and spices and olive oil for the light, for the anointing oil, and for the fragrant incense. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:29</span> The Israelites brought a freewill offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, every man and woman whose heart was willing to bring materials for all the work that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> through Moses had commanded them to do. </p>

</body>
</html>