<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 97</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 97</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> reigns.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the earth be happy.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the many coastlands rejoice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:2</span> Dark clouds surround him;</p>
<p class="poetry">equity and justice are the foundation of his throne. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:3</span> Fire goes before him;</p>
<p class="poetry">on every side it burns up his enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:4</span> His lightning bolts light up the world;</p>
<p class="poetry">the earth sees and trembles. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:5</span> The mountains melt like wax before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">before the Lord of the whole earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:6</span> The sky declares his justice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all the nations see his splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:7</span> All who worship idols are ashamed,</p>
<p class="poetry">those who boast about worthless idols.</p>
<p class="poetry">All the gods bow down before him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:8</span> Zion hears and rejoices,</p>
<p class="poetry">the towns of Judah are happy,</p>
<p class="poetry">because of your judgments, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:9</span> For you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, are the Most High over the whole earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">you are elevated high above all gods. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:10</span> You who love the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, hate evil!</p>
<p class="poetry">He protects the lives of his faithful followers;</p>
<p class="poetry">he delivers them from the power of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:11</span> The godly bask in the light;</p>
<p class="poetry">the morally upright experience joy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">97:12</span> You godly ones, rejoice in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">Give thanks to his holy name. </p>

</body>
</html>