<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to Zophar </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:1</span> Then Job answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:2</span> “Listen carefully to my words;</p>
<p class="poetry">let this be the consolation you offer me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:3</span> Bear with me and I will speak,</p>
<p class="poetry">and after I have spoken you may mock. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:4</span> Is my complaint against a man? </p>
<p class="poetry">If so, why should I not be impatient? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:5</span> Look at me and be appalled;</p>
<p class="poetry">put your hands over your mouths. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:6</span> For, when I think about this, I am terrified </p>
<p class="poetry">and my body feels a shudder. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Wicked Prosper</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:7</span> “Why do the wicked go on living, </p>
<p class="poetry">grow old, even increase in power? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:8</span> Their children are firmly established in their presence, </p>
<p class="poetry">their offspring before their eyes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:9</span> Their houses are safe and without fear; </p>
<p class="poetry">and no rod of punishment from God is upon them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:10</span> Their bulls breed without fail; </p>
<p class="poetry">their cows calve and do not miscarry. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:11</span> They allow their children to run like a flock;</p>
<p class="poetry">their little ones dance about. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:12</span> They sing to the accompaniment of tambourine and harp,</p>
<p class="poetry">and make merry to the sound of the flute. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:13</span> They live out their years in prosperity</p>
<p class="poetry">and go down to the grave in peace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:14</span> So they say to God, ‘Turn away from us!</p>
<p class="poetry">We do not want to know your ways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:15</span> Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him?</p>
<p class="poetry">What would we gain </p>
<p class="poetry">if we were to pray to him?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:16</span> But their prosperity is not their own doing. </p>
<p class="poetry">The counsel of the wicked is far from me! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">How Often Do the Wicked Suffer?</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:17</span> “How often is the lamp of the wicked extinguished?</p>
<p class="poetry">How often does their misfortune come upon them?</p>
<p class="poetry">How often does God apportion pain to them in his anger? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:18</span> How often are they like straw before the wind,</p>
<p class="poetry">and like chaff swept away by a whirlwind? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:19</span> You may say, ‘God stores up a man’s punishment for his children!’ </p>
<p class="poetry">Instead let him repay the man himself </p>
<p class="poetry">so that he may be humbled! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:20</span> Let his own eyes see his destruction; </p>
<p class="poetry">let him drink of the anger of the Almighty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:21</span> For what is his interest in his home </p>
<p class="poetry">after his death, </p>
<p class="poetry">when the number of his months </p>
<p class="poetry">has been broken off? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:22</span> Can anyone teach God knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">since he judges those that are on high? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Death Levels Everything</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:23</span> “One man dies in his full vigor, </p>
<p class="poetry">completely secure and prosperous, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:24</span> his body well nourished, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the marrow of his bones moist. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:25</span> And another man dies in bitterness of soul, </p>
<p class="poetry">never having tasted anything good. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:26</span> Together they lie down in the dust,</p>
<p class="poetry">and worms cover over them both.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Futile Words, Deceptive Answers</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:27</span> “Yes, I know what you are thinking, </p>
<p class="poetry">the schemes by which you would wrong me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:28</span> For you say, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Where now is the nobleman’s house, </p>
<p class="poetry">and where are the tents in which the wicked lived?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:29</span> Have you never questioned those who travel the roads?</p>
<p class="poetry">Do you not recognize their accounts —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:30</span> that the evil man is spared</p>
<p class="poetry">from the day of his misfortune,</p>
<p class="poetry">that he is delivered </p>
<p class="poetry">from the day of God’s wrath? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:31</span> No one denounces his conduct to his face;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one repays him for what he has done. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:32</span> And when he is carried to the tombs,</p>
<p class="poetry">and watch is kept over the funeral mound, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:33</span> The clods of the torrent valley are sweet to him;</p>
<p class="poetry">behind him everybody follows in procession,</p>
<p class="poetry">and before him goes a countless throng. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:34</span> So how can you console me with your futile words?</p>
<p class="poetry">Nothing is left of your answers but deception!” </p>

</body>
</html>