<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Corinthians 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Suffering Servants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Now because we are fellow workers, we also urge you not to receive the grace of God in vain. <span class="verse">6:2</span> For he says, “<i><b>I heard you at the acceptable time, and in the day of salvation I helped you</b></i>.” Look, now is <b><i>the acceptable time</i></b>; look, now is <b><i>the day of salvation</i></b>! <span class="verse">6:3</span> We do not give anyone an occasion for taking an offense in anything, so that no fault may be found with our ministry. <span class="verse">6:4</span> But as God’s servants, we have commended ourselves in every way, with great endurance, in persecutions, in difficulties, in distresses, <span class="verse">6:5</span> in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in troubles, in sleepless nights, in hunger, <span class="verse">6:6</span> by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by benevolence, by the Holy Spirit, by genuine love, <span class="verse">6:7</span> by truthful teaching, by the power of God, with weapons of righteousness both for the right hand and for the left, <span class="verse">6:8</span> through glory and dishonor, through slander and praise; regarded as impostors, and yet true; <span class="verse">6:9</span> as unknown, and yet well-known; as dying and yet—see!—we continue to live; as those who are scourged and yet not executed; <span class="verse">6:10</span> as sorrowful, but always rejoicing, as poor, but making many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing everything. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:11</span> We have spoken freely to you, Corinthians; our heart has been opened wide to you. <span class="verse">6:12</span> Our affection for you is not restricted, but you are restricted in your affections for us. <span class="verse">6:13</span> Now as a fair exchange—I speak as to my children—open wide your hearts to us also. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Unequal Partners</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:14</span> Do not become partners with those who do not believe, for what partnership is there between righteousness and lawlessness, or what fellowship does light have with darkness? <span class="verse">6:15</span> And what agreement does Christ have with Beliar? Or what does a believer share in common with an unbeliever? <span class="verse">6:16</span> And what mutual agreement does the temple of God have with idols? For we are the temple of the living God, just as God said, “<b><i>I will live in them</i></b> <i><b>and</b></i> <i><b>will walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people</b></i>.” <span class="verse">6:17</span> Therefore “<i><b>come out from their midst, and be separate</b></i>,” says the Lord, “<i><b>and</b></i> <i><b>touch no unclean thing</b>,</i> <i>and</i> <i>I will welcome</i> <i>you</i>, <span class="verse">6:18</span> <i>and</i> <i>I will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters</i>,” says the All-Powerful Lord. </p>

</body>
</html>