<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jeremiah 47</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jeremiah<br />Chapter 47</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judgment on the Philistine Cities</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">47:1</span> This was the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message to the prophet Jeremiah about the Philistines before Pharaoh attacked Gaza: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:2</span> “Look! Enemies are gathering in the north like water rising in a river. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will be like an overflowing stream.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will overwhelm the whole country and everything in it like a flood.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will overwhelm the cities and their inhabitants.</p>
<p class="poetry">People will cry out in alarm.</p>
<p class="poetry">Everyone living in the country will cry out in pain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:3</span> Fathers will hear the hoofbeats of the enemies’ horses,</p>
<p class="poetry">the clatter of their chariots and the rumbling of their wheels.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will not turn back to save their children</p>
<p class="poetry">because they will be paralyzed with fear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:4</span> For the time has come </p>
<p class="poetry">to destroy all the Philistines.</p>
<p class="poetry">The time has come to destroy all the help</p>
<p class="poetry">that remains for Tyre and Sidon. </p>
<p class="poetry">For I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, will destroy the Philistines,</p>
<p class="poetry">that remnant that came from the island of Crete. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:5</span> The people of Gaza will shave their heads in mourning.</p>
<p class="poetry">The people of Ashkelon will be struck dumb.</p>
<p class="poetry">How long will you gash yourselves to show your sorrow, </p>
<p class="poetry">you who remain of Philistia’s power? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:6</span> How long will you cry out, ‘Oh, sword of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">how long will it be before you stop killing? </p>
<p class="poetry">Go back into your sheath;</p>
<p class="poetry">stay there and rest!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">47:7</span> But how can it rest </p>
<p class="poetry">when I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have given it orders?</p>
<p class="poetry">I have ordered it to attack</p>
<p class="poetry">the people of Ashkelon and the seacoast.” </p>

</body>
</html>