<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Obadiah 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Obadiah<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Judgment on Edom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:1</span> The vision that Obadiah saw. </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says this concerning Edom: </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Edom’s Approaching Destruction</p><p class="poetry">We have heard a report from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">An envoy was sent among the nations, saying, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Arise! Let us make war against Edom!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says, “Look! I will make you a weak nation; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will be greatly despised! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> Your presumptuous heart has deceived you—</p>
<p class="poetry">you who reside in the safety of the rocky cliffs, </p>
<p class="poetry">whose home is high in the mountains. </p>
<p class="poetry">You think to yourself, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘No one can bring me down to the ground!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> Even if you were to soar high like an eagle, </p>
<p class="poetry">even if you were to make your nest among the stars,</p>
<p class="poetry">I can bring you down even from there!” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">1:5</span> “If thieves came to rob you during the night, </p>
<p class="poetry">they would steal only as much as they wanted. </p>
<p class="poetry">If grape pickers came to harvest your vineyards, </p>
<p class="poetry">they would leave some behind for the poor. </p>
<p class="poetry">But you will be totally destroyed! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> How the people of Esau will be thoroughly plundered! </p>
<p class="poetry">Their hidden valuables will be ransacked! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> All your allies will force you from your homeland! </p>
<p class="poetry">Your treaty partners will deceive you and overpower you.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your trusted friends will set an ambush for you</p>
<p class="poetry">that will take you by surprise! </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">1:8</span> At that time,” the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says,</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will destroy the wise sages of Edom, </p>
<p class="poetry">the advisers from Esau’s mountain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> Your warriors will be shattered, O Teman, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that everyone will be destroyed from Esau’s mountain! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Edom’s Treachery Against Judah</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> “Because you violently slaughtered your relatives, the people of Jacob, </p>
<p class="poetry">shame will cover you, and you will be destroyed forever. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> You stood aloof while strangers took his army captive,</p>
<p class="poetry">and foreigners advanced to his gates. </p>
<p class="poetry">When they cast lots over Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry">you behaved as though you were in league with them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> You should not have gloated when your relatives suffered calamity. </p>
<p class="poetry">You should not have rejoiced over the people of Judah when they were destroyed. </p>
<p class="poetry">You should not have boasted when they suffered adversity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> You should not have entered the city of my people when they experienced distress. </p>
<p class="poetry">You should not have joined in gloating over their misfortune when they suffered distress. </p>
<p class="poetry">You should not have looted their wealth when they endured distress. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> You should not have stood at the fork in the road to slaughter those trying to escape. </p>
<p class="poetry">You should not have captured their refugees when they suffered adversity. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Coming Day of the Lord</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> “For the day of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is approaching for all the nations! </p>
<p class="poetry">Just as you have done, so it will be done to you.</p>
<p class="poetry">You will get exactly what your deeds deserve. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> For just as you have drunk on my holy mountain,</p>
<p class="poetry">so all the nations will drink continually. </p>
<p class="poetry">They will drink, and they will gulp down;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will be as though they had never been. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> But on Mount Zion there will be a remnant of those who escape, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it will be a holy place once again.</p>
<p class="poetry">The descendants of Jacob will conquer </p>
<p class="poetry">those who had conquered them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:18</span> The descendants of Jacob will be a fire,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the descendants of Joseph a flame.</p>
<p class="poetry">The descendants of Esau will be like stubble.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will burn them up and devour them.</p>
<p class="poetry">There will not be a single survivor of the descendants of Esau!”</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:19</span> The people of the Negev will take possession of Esau’s mountain,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the people of the foothills will take </p>
<p class="poetry">possession of the land of the Philistines.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will also take possession of the territory of Ephraim and the territory of Samaria,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the people of Benjamin will take possession of Gilead. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:20</span> The exiles of this fortress of the people of Israel </p>
<p class="poetry">will take possession of what belongs to </p>
<p class="poetry">the people of Canaan, as far as Zarephath, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the exiles of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad </p>
<p class="poetry">will take possession of the towns of the Negev. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:21</span> Those who have been delivered will go up on Mount Zion</p>
<p class="poetry">in order to rule over Esau’s mountain.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will reign as King! </p>

</body>
</html>