<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 28</h2><p class="psasuper">By David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:1</span> To you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I cry out!</p>
<p class="poetry">My Protector, do not ignore me. </p>
<p class="poetry">If you do not respond to me, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will join those who are descending into the grave. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:2</span> Hear my plea for mercy when I cry out to you for help,</p>
<p class="poetry">when I lift my hands toward your holy temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:3</span> Do not drag me away with evil men,</p>
<p class="poetry">with those who behave wickedly, </p>
<p class="poetry">who talk so friendly to their neighbors, </p>
<p class="poetry">while they plan to harm them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:4</span> Pay them back for their evil deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay them back for what they do.</p>
<p class="poetry">Punish them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:5</span> For they do not understand the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s actions,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the way he carries out justice. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will permanently demolish them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> deserves praise, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he has heard my plea for mercy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> strengthens and protects me; </p>
<p class="poetry">I trust in him with all my heart. </p>
<p class="poetry">I am rescued and my heart is full of joy; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing to him in gratitude. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:8</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> strengthens his people; </p>
<p class="poetry">he protects and delivers his chosen king. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:9</span> Deliver your people.</p>
<p class="poetry">Empower  the nation that belongs to you. </p>
<p class="poetry">Care for them like a shepherd and carry them in your arms at all times! </p>

</body>
</html>