<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 62</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 62</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, Jeduthun; a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:1</span> For God alone I patiently wait; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is the one who delivers me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:2</span> He alone is my protector and deliverer.</p>
<p class="poetry">He is my refuge; I will not be upended. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:3</span> How long will you threaten a man like me?</p>
<p class="poetry">All of you are murderers, </p>
<p class="poetry">as dangerous as a leaning wall or an unstable fence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:4</span> They spend all their time planning how to bring their victim down. </p>
<p class="poetry">They love to use deceit; </p>
<p class="poetry">they pronounce blessings with their mouths,</p>
<p class="poetry">but inwardly they utter curses. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:5</span> Patiently wait for God alone, my soul! </p>
<p class="poetry">For he is the one who gives me hope. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:6</span> He alone is my protector and deliverer.</p>
<p class="poetry">He is my refuge; I will not be shaken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:7</span> God delivers me and exalts me;</p>
<p class="poetry">God is my strong protector and my shelter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:8</span> Trust in him at all times, you people!</p>
<p class="poetry">Pour out your hearts before him. </p>
<p class="poetry">God is our shelter. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:9</span> Men are nothing but a mere breath;</p>
<p class="poetry">human beings are unreliable. </p>
<p class="poetry">When they are weighed in the scales,</p>
<p class="poetry">all of them together are lighter than air. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:10</span> Do not trust in what you can gain by oppression. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not put false confidence in what you can gain by robbery. </p>
<p class="poetry">If wealth increases, do not become attached to it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:11</span> God has declared one principle;</p>
<p class="poetry">two principles I have heard: </p>
<p class="poetry">God is strong, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">62:12</span> and you, O Lord, demonstrate loyal love. </p>
<p class="poetry">For you repay men for what they do. </p>

</body>
</html>