<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> The land allotted to the tribe of Judah by its clans reached to the border of Edom, to the wilderness of Zin in the Negev far to the south. <span class="verse">15:2</span> Their southern border started at the southern tip of the Salt Sea, <span class="verse">15:3</span> extended south of the Scorpion Ascent, crossed to Zin, went up from the south to Kadesh Barnea, crossed to Hezron, went up to Addar, and turned toward Karka. <span class="verse">15:4</span> It then crossed to Azmon, extended to the Stream of Egypt, and ended at the Mediterranean Sea. This was their southern border. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:5</span> The eastern border was the Salt Sea to the mouth of the Jordan River. </p>
<p class="bodytext">The northern border started north of the Salt Sea at the mouth of the Jordan, <span class="verse">15:6</span> went up to Beth Hoglah, crossed north of Beth Arabah, and went up to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben. <span class="verse">15:7</span> It then went up to Debir from the Valley of Achor, turning northward to Gilgal (which is opposite the Pass of Adummim south of the valley), crossed to the waters of En Shemesh and extended to En Rogel. <span class="verse">15:8</span> It then went up the Valley of Ben Hinnom to the slope of the Jebusites on the south (that is, Jerusalem), going up to the top of the hill opposite the Valley of Ben Hinnom to the west, which is at the end of the Valley of the Rephaites to the north. <span class="verse">15:9</span> It then went from the top of the hill to the spring of the waters of Nephtoah, extended to the cities of Mount Ephron, and went to Baalah (that is, Kiriath Jearim). <span class="verse">15:10</span> It then turned from Baalah westward to Mount Seir, crossed to the slope of Mount Jearim on the north (that is Kesalon), descended to Beth Shemesh, and crossed to Timnah. <span class="verse">15:11</span> It then extended to the slope of Ekron to the north, went toward Shikkeron, crossed to Mount Baalah, extended to Jabneel, and ended at the sea. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:12</span> The western border was the Mediterranean Sea. These were the borders of the tribe of Judah and its clans. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:13</span> Caleb son of Jephunneh was assigned Kiriath Arba (that is Hebron) within the tribe of Judah, according to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s instructions to Joshua. (Arba was the father of Anak.) <span class="verse">15:14</span> Caleb drove out from there three Anakites—Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, descendants of Anak. <span class="verse">15:15</span> From there he attacked the people of Debir. (Debir used to be called Kiriath Sepher.) <span class="verse">15:16</span> Caleb said, “To the man who attacks and captures Kiriath Sepher I will give my daughter Achsah as a wife.” <span class="verse">15:17</span> When Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb’s brother, captured it, Caleb gave Achsah his daughter to him as a wife. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:18</span> One time Achsah came and charmed her father so that she could ask him for some land. When she got down from her donkey, Caleb said to her, “What would you like?” <span class="verse">15:19</span> She answered, “Please give me a special present. Since you have given me land in the Negev, now give me springs of water.” So he gave her both the upper and lower springs. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:20</span> This is the land assigned to the tribe of Judah by its clans: <span class="verse">15:21</span> These cities were located at the southern extremity of Judah’s tribal land near the border of Edom: Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur, <span class="verse">15:22</span> Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah, <span class="verse">15:23</span> Kedesh, Hazor, Ithnan, <span class="verse">15:24</span> Ziph, Telem, Bealoth, <span class="verse">15:25</span> Hazor Hadattah, Kerioth Hezron (that is, Hazor), <span class="verse">15:26</span> Amam, Shema, Moladah, <span class="verse">15:27</span> Hazar Gaddah, Heshbon, Beth Pelet, <span class="verse">15:28</span> Hazar Shual, Beer Sheba, Biziothiah, <span class="verse">15:29</span> Baalah, Iim, Ezem, <span class="verse">15:30</span> Eltolad, Kesil, Hormah, <span class="verse">15:31</span> Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah, <span class="verse">15:32</span> Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain, and Rimmon—a total of twenty-nine cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:33</span> These cities were in the foothills: Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah, <span class="verse">15:34</span> Zanoah, En Gannim, Tappuah, Enam, <span class="verse">15:35</span> Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah, <span class="verse">15:36</span> Shaaraim, Adithaim, and Gederah (or Gederothaim)—a total of fourteen cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:37</span> Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal Gad, <span class="verse">15:38</span> Dilean, Mizpah, Joktheel, <span class="verse">15:39</span> Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon, <span class="verse">15:40</span> Cabbon, Lahmas, Kitlish, <span class="verse">15:41</span> Gederoth, Beth Dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah—a total of sixteen cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:42</span> Libnah, Ether, Ashan, <span class="verse">15:43</span> Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib, <span class="verse">15:44</span> Keilah, Achzib, and Mareshah—a total of nine cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:45</span> Ekron and its surrounding towns and settlements; <span class="verse">15:46</span> from Ekron westward, all those in the vicinity of Ashdod and their towns; <span class="verse">15:47</span> Ashdod with its surrounding towns and settlements, and Gaza with its surrounding towns and settlements, as far as the Stream of Egypt and the border at the Mediterranean Sea. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:48</span> These cities were in the hill country: Shamir, Jattir, Socoh, <span class="verse">15:49</span> Dannah, Kiriath Sannah (that is, Debir), <span class="verse">15:50</span> Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim, <span class="verse">15:51</span> Goshen, Holon, and Giloh—a total of eleven cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:52</span> Arab, Dumah, Eshan, <span class="verse">15:53</span> Janim, Beth Tappuah, Aphekah, <span class="verse">15:54</span> Humtah, Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior—a total of nine cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:55</span> Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah, <span class="verse">15:56</span> Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah, <span class="verse">15:57</span> Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah—a total of ten cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:58</span> Halhul, Beth Zur, Gedor, <span class="verse">15:59</span> Maarath, Beth Anoth, and Eltekon—a total of six cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:60</span> Kiriath Baal (that is, Kiriath Jearim) and Rabbah—a total of two cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:61</span> These cities were in the wilderness: Beth Arabah, Middin, Secacah, <span class="verse">15:62</span> Nibshan, the City of Salt, and En Gedi—a total of six cities and their towns. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:63</span> The men of Judah were unable to conquer the Jebusites living in Jerusalem. The Jebusites live with the people of Judah in Jerusalem to this very day. </p>

</body>
</html>