<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 18</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 18</h1>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:1</span> One who has isolated himself seeks his own desires; </p>
<p class="poetry">he rejects all sound judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:2</span> A fool takes no pleasure in understanding</p>
<p class="poetry">but only in disclosing what is on his mind. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:3</span> When a wicked person arrives, contempt shows up with him, </p>
<p class="poetry">and with shame comes a reproach. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:4</span> The words of a person’s mouth are like deep waters, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the fountain of wisdom is like a flowing brook. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:5</span> It is terrible to show partiality to the wicked, </p>
<p class="poetry">by depriving a righteous man of justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:6</span> The lips of a fool enter into strife, </p>
<p class="poetry">and his mouth invites a flogging. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:7</span> The mouth of a fool is his ruin,</p>
<p class="poetry">and his lips are a snare for his life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:8</span> The words of a gossip are like choice morsels; </p>
<p class="poetry">and they have gone down into the person’s innermost being. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:9</span> The one who is slack in his work</p>
<p class="poetry">is a brother to one who destroys. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:10</span> The name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is like a strong tower; </p>
<p class="poetry">the righteous person runs to it and is set safely on high. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:11</span> The wealth of a rich person is like a strong city, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it is like a high wall in his imagination. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:12</span> Before destruction the heart of a person is proud,</p>
<p class="poetry">but humility comes before honor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:13</span> The one who gives an answer before he listens —</p>
<p class="poetry">that is his folly and his shame. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:14</span> A person’s spirit sustains him through sickness—</p>
<p class="poetry">but who can bear a crushed spirit? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:15</span> The discerning person acquires knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the wise person seeks knowledge. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:16</span> A person’s gift makes room for him,</p>
<p class="poetry">and leads him before important people.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:17</span> The first to state his case seems right,</p>
<p class="poetry">until his opponent begins to cross-examine him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:18</span> A toss of a coin ends disputes,</p>
<p class="poetry">and settles the issue between strong opponents. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:19</span> A relative offended is harder to reach than a strong city,</p>
<p class="poetry">and disputes are like the barred gates of a fortified citadel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:20</span> From the fruit of a person’s mouth his stomach will be satisfied, </p>
<p class="poetry">with the product of his lips he will be satisfied.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:21</span> Death and life are in the power of the tongue, </p>
<p class="poetry">and those who love its use will eat its fruit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:22</span> The one who has found a good wife has found what goodness is, </p>
<p class="poetry">and obtained a delightful gift from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:23</span> A poor person makes supplications, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a rich man answers harshly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">18:24</span> There are companions who harm one another, </p>
<p class="poetry">but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother. </p>

</body>
</html>