<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 66</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 66</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a song, a psalm.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:1</span> Shout out praise to God, all the earth! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:2</span> Sing praises about the majesty of his reputation. </p>
<p class="poetry">Give him the honor he deserves! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:3</span> Say to God:</p>
<p class="poetry">“How awesome are your deeds!</p>
<p class="poetry">Because of your great power your enemies cower in fear before you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:4</span> All the earth worships you</p>
<p class="poetry">and sings praises to you.</p>
<p class="poetry">They sing praises to your name.” (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:5</span> Come and witness God’s exploits! </p>
<p class="poetry">His acts on behalf of people are awesome. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:6</span> He turned the sea into dry land; </p>
<p class="poetry">they passed through the river on foot. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let us rejoice in him there. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:7</span> He rules by his power forever;</p>
<p class="poetry">he watches the nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Stubborn rebels should not exalt themselves. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:8</span> Praise our God, you nations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Loudly proclaim his praise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:9</span> He preserves our lives </p>
<p class="poetry">and does not allow our feet to slip. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:10</span> For you, O God, tested us;</p>
<p class="poetry">you purified us like refined silver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:11</span> You led us into a trap; </p>
<p class="poetry">you caused us to suffer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:12</span> You allowed men to ride over our heads;</p>
<p class="poetry">we passed through fire and water,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you brought us out into a wide open place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:13</span> I will enter your temple with burnt sacrifices;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will fulfill the vows I made to you,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:14</span> which my lips uttered</p>
<p class="poetry">and my mouth spoke when I was in trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:15</span> I will offer up to you fattened animals as burnt sacrifices,</p>
<p class="poetry">along with the smell of sacrificial rams.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will offer cattle and goats. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:16</span> Come! Listen, all you who are loyal to God. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will declare what he has done for me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:17</span> I cried out to him for help </p>
<p class="poetry">and praised him with my tongue. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:18</span> If I had harbored sin in my heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">the Lord would not have listened. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:19</span> However, God heard;</p>
<p class="poetry">he listened to my prayer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">66:20</span> God deserves praise, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he did not reject my prayer</p>
<p class="poetry">or abandon his love for me. </p>

</body>
</html>