<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Haggai 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Haggai<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> On the first day of the sixth month of King Darius’ second year, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak: </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Accusation of Indifference Against the People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:2</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has said: “These people have said, ‘The time for rebuilding the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s temple has not yet come.’” <span class="verse">1:3</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came through the prophet Haggai as follows: <span class="verse">1:4</span> “Is it right for you to live in richly paneled houses while my temple is in ruins? <span class="verse">1:5</span> Here then, this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has said: ‘Think carefully about what you are doing. <span class="verse">1:6</span> You have planted much, but have harvested little. You eat, but are never filled. You drink, but are still thirsty. You put on clothes, but are not warm. Those who earn wages end up with holes in their money bags.’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Consequences of the Failure to Rebuild the Temple</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:7</span> Moreover, this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has said: “Pay close attention to these things also. <span class="verse">1:8</span> Go up to the hill country and bring back timber to build the temple. Then I will be pleased and honored,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">1:9</span> “You expected a large harvest, but instead there was little. And when you would bring it home, I would blow it right away. Why?” asks the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. “Because my temple remains in ruins, thanks to each of you favoring his own house! <span class="verse">1:10</span> This is why the sky has held back its dew and the earth its produce. <span class="verse">1:11</span> Moreover, I have called for a drought that will affect the fields, the hill country, the grain, new wine, fresh olive oil, and everything that grows from the ground; it also will harm people, animals, and everything they produce.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Response of the Leaders and the People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:12</span> Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak, along with the whole remnant of the people, obeyed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God. They responded favorably to the message of the prophet Haggai, who spoke just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God had instructed him, and the people began to respect the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">1:13</span> Then Haggai, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s messenger, spoke the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s announcement to the people: “I am with you,” decrees the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">1:14</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> energized and encouraged Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak, and the whole remnant of the people. They came and worked on the temple of their God, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. <span class="verse">1:15</span> This took place on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month of King Darius’ second year. </p>

</body>
</html>