<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">David’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> These were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebron: </p>
<p class="bodytext">The firstborn was Amnon, whose mother was Ahinoam from Jezreel; </p>
<p class="bodytext">the second was Daniel, whose mother was Abigail from Carmel; </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:2</span> the third was Absalom whose mother was Maacah, daughter of King Talmai of Geshur;</p>
<p class="bodytext">the fourth was Adonijah, whose mother was Haggith; </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:3</span> the fifth was Shephatiah, whose mother was Abital;</p>
<p class="bodytext">the sixth was Ithream, whose mother was Eglah, David’s wife. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:4</span> These six were born to David in Hebron, where he ruled for seven years and six months.</p>
<p class="bodytext">He ruled thirty-three years in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">3:5</span> These were the sons born to him in Jerusalem:</p>
<p class="bodytext">Shimea, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon—the mother of these four was Bathsheba the daughter of Ammiel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:6</span> The other nine were Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet, <span class="verse">3:7</span> Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, <span class="verse">3:8</span> Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:9</span> These were all the sons of David, not counting the sons of his concubines. Tamar was their sister. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Solomon’s Descendants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:10</span> Solomon’s son was Rehoboam,</p>
<p class="bodytext">followed by Abijah his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Asa his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Jehoshaphat his son, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:11</span> Joram his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Ahaziah his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Joash his son, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Amaziah his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Azariah his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Jotham his son, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:13</span> Ahaz his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Hezekiah his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Manasseh his son, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:14</span> Amon his son,</p>
<p class="bodytext">Josiah his son. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:15</span> The sons of Josiah: Johanan was the firstborn; Jehoiakim was born second; Zedekiah third; and Shallum fourth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:16</span> The sons of Jehoiakim: his son Jehoiachin and his son Zedekiah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:17</span> The sons of Jehoiachin the exile: Shealtiel his son, <span class="verse">3:18</span> Malkiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:19</span> The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and Shimei.</p>
<p class="bodytext">The sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah. Shelomith was their sister. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:20</span> The five others were Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah, and Jushab Hesed. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:21</span> The descendants of Hananiah: Pelatiah, Jeshaiah, the sons of Rephaiah, of Arnan, of Obadiah, and of Shecaniah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:22</span> The descendants of Shecaniah: Shemaiah and his sons: Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat—six in all.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:23</span> The sons of Neariah: Elioenai, Hizkiah, and Azrikam—three in all.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:24</span> The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib, Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and Anani—seven in all.</p>

</body>
</html>