<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 29</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 29</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle"><b>IV. Job’s Concluding Soliloquy (29:1—31:40)</b></p><p class="paragraphtitle">Job Recalls His Former Condition </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:1</span> Then Job continued his speech: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:2</span> “O that I could be as I was </p>
<p class="poetry">in the months now gone, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the days when God watched over me,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:3</span> when he caused his lamp </p>
<p class="poetry">to shine upon my head,</p>
<p class="poetry">and by his light </p>
<p class="poetry">I walked through darkness; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:4</span> just as I was in my most productive time, </p>
<p class="poetry">when God’s intimate friendship was experienced in my tent, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:5</span> when the Almighty was still with me</p>
<p class="poetry">and my children were around me; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:6</span> when my steps were bathed with butter </p>
<p class="poetry">and the rock poured out for me streams of olive oil! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:7</span> When I went out to the city gate</p>
<p class="poetry">and secured my seat in the public square, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:8</span> the young men would see me and step aside, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the old men would get up and remain standing; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:9</span> the chief men refrained from talking</p>
<p class="poetry">and covered their mouths with their hands; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:10</span> the voices of the nobles fell silent, </p>
<p class="poetry">and their tongues stuck to the roof of their mouths. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Benevolence</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:11</span> “As soon as the ear heard these things, it blessed me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and when the eye saw them, it bore witness to me,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:12</span> for I rescued the poor who cried out for help,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the orphan who had no one to assist him;</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:13</span> the blessing of the dying man descended on me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and I made the widow’s heart rejoice; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:14</span> I put on righteousness and it clothed me, </p>
<p class="poetry">my just dealing was like a robe and a turban; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:15</span> I was eyes for the blind</p>
<p class="poetry">and feet for the lame; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:16</span> I was a father to the needy,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I investigated the case of the person I did not know; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:17</span> I broke the fangs of the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">and made him drop his prey from his teeth. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Confidence</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:18</span> “Then I thought, ‘I will die in my own home, </p>
<p class="poetry">my days as numerous as the grains of sand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:19</span> My roots reach the water,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the dew lies on my branches all night long.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:20</span> My glory will always be fresh in me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my bow ever new in my hand.’ </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reputation</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:21</span> “People listened to me and waited silently; </p>
<p class="poetry">they kept silent for my advice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:22</span> After I had spoken, they did not respond;</p>
<p class="poetry">my words fell on them drop by drop. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:23</span> They waited for me as people wait for the rain,</p>
<p class="poetry">and they opened their mouths as for the spring rains. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:24</span> If I smiled at them, they hardly believed it; </p>
<p class="poetry">and they did not cause the light of my face to darken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:25</span> I chose the way for them </p>
<p class="poetry">and sat as their chief; </p>
<p class="poetry">I lived like a king among his troops;</p>
<p class="poetry">I was like one who comforts mourners. </p>

</body>
</html>