<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> (13:23) Abijah passed away and was buried in the City of David. His son Asa replaced him as king. During his reign the land had rest for ten years. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Asa’s Religious and Military Accomplishments</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:2</span> (14:1) Asa did what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God desired and approved. <span class="verse">14:3</span> He removed the pagan altars and the high places, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the Asherah poles. <span class="verse">14:4</span> He ordered Judah to seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors and to observe his law and commands. <span class="verse">14:5</span> He removed the high places and the incense altars from all the towns of Judah. The kingdom had rest under his rule. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:6</span> He built fortified cities throughout Judah, for the land was at rest and there was no war during those years; the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> gave him peace. <span class="verse">14:7</span> He said to the people of Judah: “Let’s build these cities and fortify them with walls, towers, and barred gates. The land remains ours because we have followed the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God; we have followed him, and he has made us secure on all sides.” So they built the cities and prospered. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:8</span> Asa had an army of 300,000 men from Judah, equipped with large shields and spears. He also had 280,000 men from Benjamin who carried small shields and were adept archers; they were all skilled warriors. <span class="verse">14:9</span> Zerah the Cushite marched against them with an army of 1,000,000 men and 300 chariots . He arrived at Mareshah, <span class="verse">14:10</span> and Asa went out to oppose him. They deployed for battle in the Valley of Zephathah near Mareshah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:11</span> Asa prayed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God: “O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, there is no one but you who can help the weak when they are vastly outnumbered. Help us, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God, for we rely on you and have marched on your behalf against this huge army. O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you are our God; don’t let men prevail against you!” <span class="verse">14:12</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> struck down the Cushites before Asa and Judah. The Cushites fled, <span class="verse">14:13</span> and Asa and his army chased them as far as Gerar. The Cushites were wiped out; they were shattered before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and his army. The men of Judah carried off a huge amount of plunder. <span class="verse">14:14</span> They defeated all the towns surrounding Gerar, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> caused them to panic. The men of Judah looted all the towns, for they contained a huge amount of goods. <span class="verse">14:15</span> They also attacked the tents of the herdsmen in charge of the livestock. They carried off many sheep and camels and then returned to Jerusalem. </p>

</body>
</html>