<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Benjamin’s Descendants (Continued)</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Benjamin was the father of Bela, his firstborn; Ashbel was born second, Aharah third, <span class="verse">8:2</span> Nohah fourth, and Rapha fifth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:3</span> Bela’s sons were Addar, Gera, Abihud, <span class="verse">8:4</span> Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, <span class="verse">8:5</span> Gera, Shephuphan, and Huram. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:6</span> These were the descendants of Ehud who were leaders of the families living in Geba who were forced to move to Manahath: <span class="verse">8:7</span> Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera, who moved them. Gera was the father of Uzzah and Ahihud. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:8</span> Shaharaim fathered sons in Moab after he divorced his wives Hushim and Baara. <span class="verse">8:9</span> By his wife Hodesh he fathered Jobab, Zibia, Mesha, Malkam, <span class="verse">8:10</span> Jeuz, Sakia, and Mirmah. These were his sons; they were family leaders. <span class="verse">8:11</span> By Hushim he fathered Abitub and Elpaal. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:12</span> The sons of Elpaal: Eber, Misham, Shemed (who built Ono and Lod, as well as its surrounding towns), <span class="verse">8:13</span> Beriah, and Shema. They were leaders of the families living in Aijalon and chased out the inhabitants of Gath. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Ahio, Shashak, Jeremoth, <span class="verse">8:15</span> Zebadiah, Arad, Eder, <span class="verse">8:16</span> Michael, Ishpah, and Joha were the sons of Beriah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:17</span> Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber, <span class="verse">8:18</span> Ishmerai, Izliah, and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:19</span> Jakim, Zikri, Zabdi, <span class="verse">8:20</span> Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel, <span class="verse">8:21</span> Adaiah, Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:22</span> Ishpan, Eber, Eliel, <span class="verse">8:23</span> Abdon, Zikri, Hanan, <span class="verse">8:24</span> Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah, <span class="verse">8:25</span> Iphdeiah, and Penuel were the sons of Shashak. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:26</span> Shamsherai, Shechariah, Athaliah, <span class="verse">8:27</span> Jaareshiah, Elijah, and Zikri were the sons of Jeroham. <span class="verse">8:28</span> These were the family leaders listed in the genealogical records; they lived in Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:29</span> The father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon; his wife’s name was Maacah. <span class="verse">8:30</span> His firstborn son was Abdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baal, Nadab, <span class="verse">8:31</span> Gedor, Ahio, Zeker, and Mikloth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:32</span> Mikloth was the father of Shimeah. They also lived near their relatives in Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:33</span> Ner was the father of Kish, and Kish was the father of Saul. Saul was the father of Jonathan, Malki-Shua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:34</span> The son of Jonathan: Meribbaal. </p>
<p class="bodytext">Meribbaal was the father of Micah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:35</span> The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and Ahaz. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:36</span> Ahaz was the father of Jehoaddah, and Jehoaddah was the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri. Zimri was the father of Moza, <span class="verse">8:37</span> and Moza was the father of Binea. His son was Raphah, whose son was Eleasah, whose son was Azel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:38</span> Azel had six sons: Azrikam his firstborn, followed by Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:39</span> The sons of his brother Eshek:</p>
<p class="bodytext">Ulam was his firstborn, Jeush second, and Eliphelet third. <span class="verse">8:40</span> The sons of Ulam were warriors who were adept archers. They had many sons and grandsons, a total of 150.</p>
<p class="bodytext">All these were the descendants of Benjamin. </p>

</body>
</html>