<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Thessalonians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Day of the Lord</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Now regarding the arrival of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to be with him, we ask you, brothers and sisters, <span class="verse">2:2</span> not to be easily shaken from your composure or disturbed by any kind of spirit or message or letter allegedly from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord is already here. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Let no one deceive you in any way. For that day will not arrive until the rebellion comes and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the son of destruction. <span class="verse">2:4</span> He opposes <i>and</i> <i>exalts himself above every</i> so-called <i>god</i> or object of worship, and as a result <i>he takes his seat</i> in God’s temple, displaying himself as God. <span class="verse">2:5</span> Surely you recall that I used to tell you these things while I was still with you. <span class="verse">2:6</span> And so you know what holds him back, so that he will be revealed in his own time. <span class="verse">2:7</span> For the hidden power of lawlessness is already at work. However, the one who holds him back will do so until he is taken out of the way, <span class="verse">2:8</span> and then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord will destroy by the breath of his mouth and wipe out by the manifestation of his arrival. <span class="verse">2:9</span> The arrival of the lawless one will be by Satan’s working with all kinds of miracles and signs and false wonders, <span class="verse">2:10</span> and with every kind of evil deception directed against those who are perishing, because they found no place in their hearts for the truth so as to be saved. <span class="verse">2:11</span> Consequently God sends on them a deluding influence so that they will believe what is false. <span class="verse">2:12</span> And so all of them who have not believed the truth but have delighted in evil will be condemned. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Call to Stand Firm</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:13</span> But we ought to thank God always for you, brothers and sisters loved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning for salvation through sanctification by the Spirit and faith in the truth. <span class="verse">2:14</span> He called you to this salvation through our gospel, so that you may possess the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">2:15</span> Therefore, brothers and sisters, stand firm and hold on to the traditions that we taught you, whether by speech or by letter. <span class="verse">2:16</span> Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and by grace gave us eternal comfort and good hope, <span class="verse">2:17</span> encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good thing you do or say. </p>

</body>
</html>