<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Luke 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Luke<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Lost Sheep and Coin </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming to hear him. <span class="verse">15:2</span> But the Pharisees and the experts in the law were complaining, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:3</span> So Jesus told them this parable: <span class="verse">15:4</span> “Which one of you, if he has a hundred sheep and loses one of them, would not leave the ninety-nine in the open pasture and go look for the one that is lost until he finds it? <span class="verse">15:5</span> Then when he has found it, he places it on his shoulders, rejoicing. <span class="verse">15:6</span> Returning home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, telling them, ‘Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost.’ <span class="verse">15:7</span> I tell you, in the same way there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous people who have no need to repent. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:8</span> “Or what woman, if she has ten silver coins and loses one of them, does not light a lamp, sweep the house, and search thoroughly until she finds it? <span class="verse">15:9</span> Then when she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin that I had lost.’ <span class="verse">15:10</span> In the same way, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of God’s angels over one sinner who repents.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Compassionate Father</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:11</span> Then Jesus said, “A man had two sons. <span class="verse">15:12</span> The younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of the estate that will belong to me.’ So he divided his assets between them. <span class="verse">15:13</span> After a few days, the younger son gathered together all he had and left on a journey to a distant country, and there he squandered his wealth with a wild lifestyle. <span class="verse">15:14</span> Then after he had spent everything, a severe famine took place in that country, and he began to be in need. <span class="verse">15:15</span> So he went and worked for one of the citizens of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed pigs. <span class="verse">15:16</span> He was longing to eat the carob pods the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything. <span class="verse">15:17</span> But when he came to his senses he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired workers have food enough to spare, but here I am dying from hunger! <span class="verse">15:18</span> I will get up and go to my father and say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. <span class="verse">15:19</span> I am no longer worthy to be called your son; treat me like one of your hired workers.”’ <span class="verse">15:20</span> So he got up and went to his father. But while he was still a long way from home his father saw him, and his heart went out to him; he ran and hugged his son and kissed him. <span class="verse">15:21</span> Then his son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you; I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’ <span class="verse">15:22</span> But the father said to his slaves, ‘Hurry! Bring the best robe, and put it on him! Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet! <span class="verse">15:23</span> Bring the fattened calf and kill it! Let us eat and celebrate, <span class="verse">15:24</span> because this son of mine was dead, and is alive again—he was lost and is found!’ So they began to celebrate. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:25</span> “Now his older son was in the field. As he came and approached the house, he heard music and dancing. <span class="verse">15:26</span> So he called one of the slaves and asked what was happening. <span class="verse">15:27</span> The slave replied, ‘Your brother has returned, and your father has killed the fattened calf because he got his son back safe and sound.’ <span class="verse">15:28</span> But the older son became angry and refused to go in. His father came out and appealed to him, <span class="verse">15:29</span> but he answered his father, ‘Look! These many years I have worked like a slave for you, and I never disobeyed your commands. Yet you never gave me even a goat so that I could celebrate with my friends! <span class="verse">15:30</span> But when this son of yours came back, who has devoured your assets with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him!’ <span class="verse">15:31</span> Then the father said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me, and everything that belongs to me is yours. <span class="verse">15:32</span> It was appropriate to celebrate and be glad, for your brother was dead, and is alive; he was lost and is found.’” </p>

</body>
</html>