<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 29</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 29</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prophecy Against Egypt</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:1</span> In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the twelfth day of the month, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">29:2</span> “Son of man, turn toward Pharaoh king of Egypt and prophesy against him and against all Egypt. <span class="verse">29:3</span> Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“‘Look, I am against you, Pharaoh king of Egypt,</p>
<p class="poetry">the great monster lying in the midst of its waterways,</p>
<p class="poetry">who has said, “My Nile is my own, I made it for myself.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:4</span> I will put hooks in your jaws</p>
<p class="poetry">and stick the fish of your waterways to your scales.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will haul you up from the midst of your waterways,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all the fish of your waterways will stick to your scales. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:5</span> I will leave you in the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">you and all the fish of your waterways;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will fall in the open field and will not be gathered up or collected. </p>
<p class="poetry">I have given you as food to the beasts of the earth and the birds of the skies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:6</span> Then all those living in Egypt will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span></p>
<p class="poetry">because they were a reed staff for the house of Israel; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">29:7</span> when they grasped you with their hand, you broke and tore their shoulders,</p>
<p class="poetry">and when they leaned on you, you splintered and caused their legs to be unsteady. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:8</span> “‘Therefore, this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Look, I am about to bring a sword against you, and I will kill every person and every animal. <span class="verse">29:9</span> The land of Egypt will become a desolate ruin. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext">“‘Because he said, “The Nile is mine and I made it,” <span class="verse">29:10</span> I am against you and your waterways. I will turn the land of Egypt into an utter desolate ruin from Migdol to Syene, as far as the border with Ethiopia. <span class="verse">29:11</span> No human foot will pass through it, and no animal’s foot will pass through it; it will be uninhabited for forty years. <span class="verse">29:12</span> I will turn the land of Egypt into a desolation in the midst of desolate lands; for forty years her cities will lie desolate in the midst of ruined cities. I will scatter Egypt among the nations and disperse them among foreign countries. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:13</span> “‘For this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: At the end of forty years I will gather Egypt from the peoples where they were scattered. <span class="verse">29:14</span> I will restore the fortunes of Egypt and will bring them back to the land of Pathros, to the land of their origin; there they will be an insignificant kingdom. <span class="verse">29:15</span> It will be the most insignificant of the kingdoms; it will never again exalt itself over the nations. I will make them so small that they will not rule over the nations. <span class="verse">29:16</span> It will never again be Israel’s source of confidence, but a reminder of how they sinned by turning to Egypt for help. Then they will know that I am the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:17</span> In the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">29:18</span> “Son of man, King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon made his army labor hard against Tyre. Every head was rubbed bald and every shoulder rubbed bare; yet he and his army received no wages from Tyre for the work he carried out against it. <span class="verse">29:19</span> Therefore this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Look, I am about to give the land of Egypt to King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon. He will carry off her wealth, capture her loot, and seize her plunder; it will be his army’s wages. <span class="verse">29:20</span> I have given him the land of Egypt as his compensation for attacking Tyre, because they did it for me, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">29:21</span> On that day I will make Israel powerful, and I will give you the right to be heard among them. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.” </p>

</body>
</html>