<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 56</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 56</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Invites Outsiders to Enter</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:1</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Promote justice! Do what is right!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I am ready to deliver you;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am ready to vindicate you openly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:2</span> The people who do this will be blessed, </p>
<p class="poetry">the people who commit themselves to obedience, </p>
<p class="poetry">who observe the Sabbath and do not defile it,</p>
<p class="poetry">who refrain from doing anything that is wrong. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:3</span> No foreigner who becomes a follower of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> should say,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will certainly exclude me from his people.’</p>
<p class="poetry">The eunuch should not say,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘Look, I am like a dried-up tree.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">56:4</span> For this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“For the eunuchs who observe my Sabbaths</p>
<p class="poetry">and choose what pleases me</p>
<p class="poetry">and are faithful to my covenant, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:5</span> I will set up within my temple and my walls a monument </p>
<p class="poetry">that will be better than sons and daughters.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will set up a permanent monument for them that will remain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:6</span> As for foreigners who become followers of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and serve him,</p>
<p class="poetry">who love the name of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and want to be his servants—</p>
<p class="poetry">all who observe the Sabbath and do not defile it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and who are faithful to my covenant—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:7</span> I will bring them to my holy mountain;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will make them happy in the temple where people pray to me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their burnt offerings and sacrifices will be accepted on my altar,</p>
<p class="poetry">for my temple will be known as a temple where all nations may pray.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:8</span> The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says this,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who gathers the dispersed of Israel:</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will still gather them up.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Denounces Israel’s Paganism</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:9</span> All you wild animals in the fields, come and devour,</p>
<p class="poetry">all you wild animals in the forest! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:10</span> All their watchmen are blind,</p>
<p class="poetry">they are unaware. </p>
<p class="poetry">All of them are like mute dogs,</p>
<p class="poetry">unable to bark.</p>
<p class="poetry">They pant, lie down,</p>
<p class="poetry">and love to snooze. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:11</span> The dogs have big appetites;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are never full. </p>
<p class="poetry">They are shepherds who have no understanding;</p>
<p class="poetry">they all go their own way,</p>
<p class="poetry">each one looking for monetary gain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:12</span> Each one says, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Come on, I’ll get some wine!</p>
<p class="poetry">Let’s guzzle some beer!</p>
<p class="poetry">Tomorrow will be just like today!</p>
<p class="poetry">We’ll have everything we want!’ </p>

</body>
</html>