<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will certainly have compassion on Jacob; he will again choose Israel as his special people and restore them to their land. Resident foreigners will join them and unite with the family of Jacob. <span class="verse">14:2</span> Nations will take them and bring them back to their own place. Then the family of Israel will make foreigners their servants as they settle in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s land. They will make their captors captives and rule over the ones who oppressed them. <span class="verse">14:3</span> When the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> gives you relief from your suffering and anxiety and from the hard labor that you were made to perform, <span class="verse">14:4</span> you will taunt the king of Babylon with these words: </p>
<p class="poetrybreak">“Look how the oppressor has met his end!</p>
<p class="poetry">Hostility has ceased! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has broken the club of the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">the scepter of rulers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:6</span> It furiously struck down nations</p>
<p class="poetry">with unceasing blows. </p>
<p class="poetry">It angrily ruled over nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">oppressing them without restraint. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:7</span> The whole earth rests and is quiet;</p>
<p class="poetry">they break into song. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:8</span> The evergreens also rejoice over your demise, </p>
<p class="poetry">as do the cedars of Lebanon, singing, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Since you fell asleep, </p>
<p class="poetry">no woodsman comes up to chop us down!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:9</span> Sheol below is stirred up about you,</p>
<p class="poetry">ready to meet you when you arrive.</p>
<p class="poetry">It rouses the spirits of the dead for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">all the former leaders of the earth; </p>
<p class="poetry">it makes all the former kings of the nations</p>
<p class="poetry">rise from their thrones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:10</span> All of them respond to you, saying:</p>
<p class="poetry">‘You too have become weak like us!</p>
<p class="poetry">You have become just like us! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:11</span> Your splendor has been brought down to Sheol,</p>
<p class="poetry">as well as the sound of your stringed instruments. </p>
<p class="poetry">You lie on a bed of maggots,</p>
<p class="poetry">with a blanket of worms over you. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">14:12</span> Look how you have fallen from the sky,</p>
<p class="poetry">O shining one, son of the dawn! </p>
<p class="poetry">You have been cut down to the ground,</p>
<p class="poetry">O conqueror of the nations! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:13</span> You said to yourself, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘I will climb up to the sky.</p>
<p class="poetry">Above the stars of El </p>
<p class="poetry">I will set up my throne.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will rule on the mountain of assembly</p>
<p class="poetry">on the remote slopes of Zaphon. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:14</span> I will climb up to the tops of the clouds;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will make myself like the Most High!’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:15</span> But you were brought down to Sheol,</p>
<p class="poetry">to the remote slopes of the Pit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:16</span> Those who see you stare at you,</p>
<p class="poetry">they look at you carefully, thinking: </p>
<p class="poetry">‘Is this the man who shook the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">the one who made kingdoms tremble? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:17</span> Is this the one who made the world like a wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">who ruined its cities,</p>
<p class="poetry">and refused to free his prisoners so they could return home?’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:18</span>  As for all the kings of the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">all of them lie down in splendor, </p>
<p class="poetry">each in his own tomb. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:19</span> But you have been thrown out of your grave</p>
<p class="poetry">like a shoot that is thrown away. </p>
<p class="poetry">You lie among the slain,</p>
<p class="poetry">among those who have been slashed by the sword,</p>
<p class="poetry">among those headed for the stones of the Pit, </p>
<p class="poetry">as if you were a mangled corpse. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:20</span> You will not be buried with them, </p>
<p class="poetry">because you destroyed your land</p>
<p class="poetry">and killed your people.</p>
<p class="poetrybreak">The offspring of the wicked</p>
<p class="poetry">will never be mentioned again.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:21</span> Prepare to execute his sons</p>
<p class="poetry">for the sins their ancestors have committed. </p>
<p class="poetry">They must not rise up and take possession of the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">or fill the surface of the world with cities. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">14:22</span> “I will rise up against them,”</p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies.</p>
<p class="poetry">“I will blot out all remembrance of Babylon and destroy all her people, </p>
<p class="poetry">including the offspring she produces,” </p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:23</span> “I will turn her into a place that is overrun with wild animals </p>
<p class="poetry">and covered with pools of stagnant water.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will get rid of her, just as one sweeps away dirt with a broom,” </p>
<p class="poetry">says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">14:24</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies makes this solemn vow:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Be sure of this:</p>
<p class="poetry">Just as I have intended, so it will be;</p>
<p class="poetry">just as I have planned, it will happen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:25</span> I will break Assyria in my land,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will trample them underfoot on my hills.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their yoke will be removed from my people,</p>
<p class="poetry">the burden will be lifted from their shoulders. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:26</span> This is the plan I have devised for the whole earth;</p>
<p class="poetry">my hand is ready to strike all the nations.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:27</span> Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has a plan,</p>
<p class="poetry">and who can possibly frustrate it?</p>
<p class="poetry">His hand is ready to strike,</p>
<p class="poetry">and who can possibly stop it? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge the Philistines</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:28</span> This oracle came in the year that King Ahaz died: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:29</span> Don’t be so happy, all you Philistines,</p>
<p class="poetry">just because the club that beat you has been broken! </p>
<p class="poetry">For a viper will grow out of the serpent’s root,</p>
<p class="poetry">and its fruit will be a darting adder. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:30</span> The poor will graze in my pastures; </p>
<p class="poetry">the needy will rest securely.</p>
<p class="poetry">But I will kill your root by famine;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will put to death all your survivors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:31</span> Wail, O city gate!</p>
<p class="poetry">Cry out, O city!</p>
<p class="poetry">Melt with fear, all you Philistines!</p>
<p class="poetry">For out of the north comes a cloud of smoke,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there are no stragglers in its ranks. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">14:32</span> How will they respond to the messengers of this nation? </p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has made Zion secure;</p>
<p class="poetry">the oppressed among his people will find safety in her.</p>

</body>
</html>