<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Babylon</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:1</span> This is an oracle about the wilderness by the Sea: </p>
<p class="poetry">Like strong winds blowing in the south, </p>
<p class="poetry">one invades from the wilderness,</p>
<p class="poetry">from a land that is feared. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:2</span> I have received a distressing message: </p>
<p class="poetry">“The deceiver deceives,</p>
<p class="poetry">the destroyer destroys.</p>
<p class="poetry">Attack, you Elamites!</p>
<p class="poetry">Lay siege, you Medes!</p>
<p class="poetry">I will put an end to all the groaning.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:3</span> For this reason my stomach churns; </p>
<p class="poetry">cramps overwhelm me</p>
<p class="poetry">like the contractions of a woman in labor.</p>
<p class="poetry">I am disturbed by what I hear,</p>
<p class="poetry">horrified by what I see. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:4</span> My heart palpitates, </p>
<p class="poetry">I shake in fear; </p>
<p class="poetry">the twilight I desired</p>
<p class="poetry">has brought me terror. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:5</span> Arrange the table,</p>
<p class="poetry">lay out the carpet,</p>
<p class="poetry">eat and drink! </p>
<p class="poetry">Get up, you officers,</p>
<p class="poetry">smear oil on the shields! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:6</span> For this is what the Lord has told me:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Go, post a guard!</p>
<p class="poetry">He must report what he sees. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:7</span> When he sees chariots, </p>
<p class="poetry">teams of horses, </p>
<p class="poetry">riders on donkeys,</p>
<p class="poetry">riders on camels,</p>
<p class="poetry">he must be alert,</p>
<p class="poetry">very alert.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:8</span> Then the guard cries out:</p>
<p class="poetry">“On the watchtower, O Lord, </p>
<p class="poetry">I stand all day long;</p>
<p class="poetry">at my post</p>
<p class="poetry">I am stationed every night. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:9</span> Look what’s coming!</p>
<p class="poetry">A charioteer,</p>
<p class="poetry">a team of horses.” </p>
<p class="poetry">When questioned, he replies, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Babylon has fallen, fallen!</p>
<p class="poetry">All the idols of her gods lie shattered on the ground!” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:10</span> O my downtrodden people, crushed like stalks on the threshing floor, </p>
<p class="poetry">what I have heard </p>
<p class="poetry">from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies,</p>
<p class="poetry">the God of Israel,</p>
<p class="poetry">I have reported to you.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Bad News for Seir</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:11</span> This is an oracle about Dumah: </p>
<p class="poetry">Someone calls to me from Seir, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Watchman, what is left of the night?</p>
<p class="poetry">Watchman, what is left of the night?” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:12</span> The watchman replies,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Morning is coming, but then night. </p>
<p class="poetry">If you want to ask, ask;</p>
<p class="poetry">come back again.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Arabia</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:13</span> This is an oracle about Arabia:</p>
<p class="poetry">In the thicket of Arabia you spend the night,</p>
<p class="poetry">you Dedanite caravans. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:14</span> Bring out some water for the thirsty.</p>
<p class="poetry">You who live in the land of Tema,</p>
<p class="poetry">bring some food for the fugitives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:15</span> For they flee from the swords—</p>
<p class="poetry">from the drawn sword,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from the battle-ready bow,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from the severity of the battle. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:16</span> For this is what the Lord has told me: “Within exactly one year all the splendor of Kedar will come to an end. <span class="verse">21:17</span> Just a handful of archers, the warriors of Kedar, will be left.” Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel has spoken. </p>

</body>
</html>