<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezra 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezra<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The People Confess Their Sins</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> While Ezra was praying and confessing, weeping and throwing himself to the ground before the temple of God, a very large crowd of Israelites—men, women, and children alike—gathered around him. The people wept loudly. <span class="verse">10:2</span> Then Shecaniah son of Jehiel, from the descendants of Elam, addressed Ezra: </p>
<p class="bodytext">“We have been unfaithful to our God by marrying foreign women from the local peoples. Nonetheless, there is still hope for Israel in this regard. <span class="verse">10:3</span> Therefore let us enact a covenant with our God to send away all these women and their offspring, in keeping with your counsel, my lord, and that of those who respect the commandments of our God. And let it be done according to the law. <span class="verse">10:4</span> Get up, for this matter concerns you. We are with you, so be strong and act decisively!”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:5</span> So Ezra got up and made the leading priests and Levites and all Israel take an oath to carry out this plan. And they all took a solemn oath. <span class="verse">10:6</span> Then Ezra got up from in front of the temple of God and went to the room of Jehohanan son of Eliashib. While he stayed there, he did not eat food or drink water, for he was in mourning over the infidelity of the exiles. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:7</span> A proclamation was circulated throughout Judah and Jerusalem that all the exiles were to be assembled in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">10:8</span> Everyone who did not come within three days would thereby forfeit all his property, in keeping with the counsel of the officials and the elders. Furthermore, he himself would be excluded from the assembly of the exiles. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:9</span> All the men of Judah and Benjamin were gathered in Jerusalem within the three days. (It was in the ninth month, on the twentieth day of that month.) All the people sat in the square at the temple of God, trembling because of this matter and because of the rains. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:10</span> Then Ezra the priest stood up and said to them, “You have behaved in an unfaithful manner by taking foreign wives! This has contributed to the guilt of Israel. <span class="verse">10:11</span> Now give praise to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of your fathers, and do his will. Separate yourselves from the local residents and from these foreign wives.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:12</span> All the assembly replied in a loud voice: “We will do just as you have said! <span class="verse">10:13</span> However, the people are numerous and it is the rainy season. We are unable to stand here outside. Furthermore, this business cannot be resolved in a day or two, for we have sinned greatly in this matter. <span class="verse">10:14</span> Let our leaders take steps on behalf of all the assembly. Let all those in our towns who have married foreign women come at an appointed time, and with them the elders of each town and its judges, until the hot anger of our God is turned away from us in this matter.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:15</span> Only Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah were against this, assisted by Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite. <span class="verse">10:16</span> So the exiles proceeded accordingly. Ezra the priest separated out by name men who were leaders in their family groups. They sat down to consider this matter on the first day of the tenth month, <span class="verse">10:17</span> and on the first day of the first month they finished considering all the men who had married foreign wives. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Those Who Had Taken Foreign Wives</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:18</span> It was determined that from the descendants of the priests, the following had taken foreign wives: from the descendants of Jeshua son of Jozadak, and his brothers: Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib, and Gedaliah. <span class="verse">10:19</span> (They gave their word to send away their wives; their guilt offering was a ram from the flock for their guilt.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:20</span> From the descendants of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:21</span> From the descendants of Harim: Maaseiah, Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel, and Uzziah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:22</span> From the descendants of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:23</span> From the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah (also known as Kelita), Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:24</span> From the singers: Eliashib. From the gatekeepers: Shallum, Telem, and Uri. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:25</span> From the Israelites: from the descendants of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malkijah, Mijamin, Eleazar, Malkijah, and Benaiah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:26</span> From the descendants of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth, and Elijah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:27</span> From the descendants of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Jeremoth, Zabad, and Aziza. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:28</span> From the descendants of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:29</span> From the descendants of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Jashub, Sheal, and Jeremoth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:30</span> From the descendants of Pahath Moab: Adna, Kelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui, and Manasseh. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:31</span> From the descendants of Harim: Eliezer, Ishijah, Malkijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, <span class="verse">10:32</span> Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:33</span> From the descendants of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:34</span> From the descendants of Bani: Maadai, Amram, Uel, <span class="verse">10:35</span> Benaiah, Bedeiah, Keluhi, <span class="verse">10:36</span> Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, <span class="verse">10:37</span> Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasu. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:38</span> From the descendants of Binnui: Shimei, <span class="verse">10:39</span> Shelemiah, Nathan, Adaiah, <span class="verse">10:40</span> Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, <span class="verse">10:41</span> Azarel, Shelemiah, Shemariah, <span class="verse">10:42</span> Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:43</span> From the descendants of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, and Benaiah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:44</span> All these had taken foreign wives, and some of them also had children by these women. </p>

</body>
</html>