<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 37</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 37</h2><p class="psasuper">By David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:1</span> Do not fret when wicked men seem to succeed. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not envy evildoers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:2</span> For they will quickly dry up like grass,</p>
<p class="poetry">and wither away like plants. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:3</span> Trust in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and do what is right.</p>
<p class="poetry">Settle in the land and maintain your integrity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:4</span> Then you will take delight in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he will answer your prayers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:5</span> Commit your future to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry">Trust in him, and he will act on your behalf. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:6</span> He will vindicate you in broad daylight,</p>
<p class="poetry">and publicly defend your just cause. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:7</span> Wait patiently for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="poetry">Wait confidently for him!</p>
<p class="poetry">Do not fret over the apparent success of a sinner, </p>
<p class="poetry">a man who carries out wicked schemes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:8</span> Do not be angry and frustrated. </p>
<p class="poetry">Do not fret. That only leads to trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:9</span> Wicked men will be wiped out, </p>
<p class="poetry">but those who rely on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> are the ones who will possess the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:10</span> Evil men will soon disappear; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will stare at the spot where they once were, but they will be gone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:11</span> But the oppressed will possess the land</p>
<p class="poetry">and enjoy great prosperity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:12</span> Evil men plot against the godly </p>
<p class="poetry">and viciously attack them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:13</span> The Lord laughs in disgust at them,</p>
<p class="poetry">for he knows that their day is coming. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:14</span> Evil men draw their swords</p>
<p class="poetry">and prepare their bows,</p>
<p class="poetry">to bring down the oppressed and needy,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to slaughter those who are godly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:15</span> Their swords will pierce their own hearts,</p>
<p class="poetry">and their bows will be broken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:16</span> The little bit that a godly man owns is better than</p>
<p class="poetry">the wealth of many evil men, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:17</span> for evil men will lose their power, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> sustains the godly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:18</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> watches over the innocent day by day, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they possess a permanent inheritance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:19</span> They will not be ashamed when hard times come; </p>
<p class="poetry">when famine comes they will have enough to eat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:20</span> But evil men will die;</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s enemies will be incinerated —</p>
<p class="poetry">they will go up in smoke. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:21</span> Evil men borrow, but do not repay their debt,</p>
<p class="poetry">but the godly show compassion and are generous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:22</span> Surely those favored by the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will possess the land,</p>
<p class="poetry">but those rejected by him will be wiped out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:23</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> grants success to the one</p>
<p class="poetry">whose behavior he finds commendable. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:24</span> Even if he trips, he will not fall headlong, </p>
<p class="poetry">for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> holds his hand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:25</span> I was once young, now I am old.</p>
<p class="poetry">I have never seen the godly abandoned,</p>
<p class="poetry">or their children forced to search for food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:26</span> All day long they show compassion and lend to others, </p>
<p class="poetry">and their children are blessed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:27</span> Turn away from evil. Do what is right. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then you will enjoy lasting security. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:28</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> promotes justice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and never abandons his faithful followers.</p>
<p class="poetry">They are permanently secure, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the children of the wicked are wiped out. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:29</span> The godly will possess the land</p>
<p class="poetry">and will dwell in it permanently. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:30</span> The godly speak wise words</p>
<p class="poetry">and promote justice. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:31</span> The law of their God controls their thinking; </p>
<p class="poetry">their feet do not slip. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:32</span> The wicked set an ambush for the godly</p>
<p class="poetry">and try to kill them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:33</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> does not surrender the godly,</p>
<p class="poetry">or allow them to be condemned in a court of law. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:34</span> Rely on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Obey his commands. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then he will permit you to possess the land;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will see the demise of the wicked. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:35</span> I have seen ruthless, wicked people </p>
<p class="poetry">growing in influence, like a green tree grows in its native soil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:36</span> But then one passes by, and suddenly they have disappeared. </p>
<p class="poetry">I looked for them, but they could not be found. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:37</span> Take note of the one who has integrity. Observe the upright.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the one who promotes peace has a future. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:38</span> Sinful rebels are totally destroyed; </p>
<p class="poetry">the wicked have no future. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:39</span> But the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> delivers the godly; </p>
<p class="poetry">he protects them in times of trouble. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">37:40</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> helps them and rescues them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he rescues them from the wicked and delivers them, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they seek his protection. </p>

</body>
</html>