<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Joshua 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Joshua<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Crosses the Jordan</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Bright and early the next morning Joshua and the Israelites left Shittim and came to the Jordan. They camped there before crossing the river. <span class="verse">3:2</span> After three days the leaders went through the camp <span class="verse">3:3</span> and commanded the people: “When you see the ark of the covenant of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God being carried by the Levitical priests, you must leave here and walk behind it. <span class="verse">3:4</span> But stay about 3,000 feet behind it. Keep your distance so you can see which way you should go, for you have not traveled this way before.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:5</span> Joshua told the people, “Ritually consecrate yourselves, for tomorrow the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will perform miraculous deeds among you.” <span class="verse">3:6</span> Joshua told the priests, “Pick up the ark of the covenant and pass on ahead of the people.” So they picked up the ark of the covenant and went ahead of the people. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:7</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told Joshua, “This very day I will begin to honor you before all Israel, so they will know that I am with you just as I was with Moses. <span class="verse">3:8</span> Instruct the priests carrying the ark of the covenant, ‘When you reach the bank of the Jordan River, wade into the water.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Joshua told the Israelites, “Come here and listen to the words of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God!” <span class="verse">3:10</span> Joshua continued, “This is how you will know the living God is among you and that he will truly drive out before you the Canaanites, Hittites, Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Amorites, and Jebusites. <span class="verse">3:11</span> Look! The ark of the covenant of the Lord of the whole earth is ready to enter the Jordan ahead of you. <span class="verse">3:12</span> Now select for yourselves twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one per tribe. <span class="verse">3:13</span> When the feet of the priests carrying the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the Lord of the whole earth, touch the water of the Jordan, the water coming downstream toward you will stop flowing and pile up.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:14</span> So when the people left their tents to cross the Jordan, the priests carrying the ark of the covenant went ahead of them. <span class="verse">3:15</span> When the ones carrying the ark reached the Jordan, and the feet of the priests carrying the ark touched the surface of the water—(the Jordan is at flood stage all during harvest time) — <span class="verse">3:16</span> the water coming downstream toward them stopped flowing. It piled up far upstream at Adam (the city near Zarethan); there was no water at all flowing to the sea of the rift valley (the Salt Sea). The people crossed the river opposite Jericho. <span class="verse">3:17</span> The priests carrying the ark of the covenant of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> stood firmly on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan. All Israel crossed over on dry ground until the entire nation was on the other side. </p>

</body>
</html>