<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 40</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 40</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to God’s Challenge</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:1</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> answered Job: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:2</span> “Will the one who contends with the Almighty correct him? </p>
<p class="poetry">Let the person who accuses God give him an answer!” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">40:3</span> Then Job answered the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>:</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:4</span> “Indeed, I am completely unworthy —how could I reply to you?</p>
<p class="poetry">I put my hand over my mouth to silence myself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:5</span> I have spoken once, but I cannot answer;</p>
<p class="poetry">twice, but I will say no more.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Second Speech </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">40:6</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> answered Job from the whirlwind: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:7</span> “Get ready for a difficult task like a man. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will question you and you will inform me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:8</span> Would you indeed annul my justice?</p>
<p class="poetry">Would you declare me guilty so that you might be right? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:9</span> Do you have an arm as powerful as God’s, </p>
<p class="poetry">and can you thunder with a voice like his?</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:10</span> Adorn yourself, then, with majesty and excellency,</p>
<p class="poetry">and clothe yourself with glory and honor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:11</span> Scatter abroad the abundance of your anger.</p>
<p class="poetry">Look at every proud man and bring him low; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:12</span> Look at every proud man and abase him;</p>
<p class="poetry">crush the wicked on the spot. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:13</span> Hide them in the dust together,</p>
<p class="poetry">imprison them in the grave. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:14</span> Then I myself will acknowledge to you</p>
<p class="poetry">that your own right hand can save you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Description of Behemoth </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:15</span> “Look now at Behemoth, which I made as I made you;</p>
<p class="poetry">it eats grass like the ox. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:16</span> Look at its strength in its loins,</p>
<p class="poetry">and its power in the muscles of its belly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:17</span> It makes its tail stiff like a cedar,</p>
<p class="poetry">the sinews of its thighs are tightly wound.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:18</span> Its bones are tubes of bronze,</p>
<p class="poetry">its limbs like bars of iron. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:19</span> It ranks first among the works of God, </p>
<p class="poetry">the One who made it </p>
<p class="poetry">has furnished it with a sword. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:20</span> For the hills bring it food, </p>
<p class="poetry">where all the wild animals play. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:21</span> Under the lotus trees it lies,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the secrecy of the reeds and the marsh. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:22</span> The lotus trees conceal it in their shadow;</p>
<p class="poetry">the poplars by the stream conceal it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:23</span> If the river rages, it is not disturbed,</p>
<p class="poetry">it is secure, though the Jordan </p>
<p class="poetry">should surge up to its mouth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">40:24</span> Can anyone catch it by its eyes, </p>
<p class="poetry">or pierce its nose with a snare? </p>

</body>
</html>