<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Amos 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Amos<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> The following is a record of what Amos prophesied. He was one of the herdsmen from Tekoa. These prophecies about Israel were revealed to him during the time of King Uzziah of Judah and King Jeroboam son of Joash of Israel, two years before the earthquake. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Will Judge the Surrounding Nations</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:2</span> Amos said:</p>
<p class="poetry">“The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> comes roaring out of Zion;</p>
<p class="poetry">from Jerusalem he comes bellowing! </p>
<p class="poetry">The shepherds’ pastures wilt; </p>
<p class="poetry">the summit of Carmel withers.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because Damascus has committed three crimes —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four! —I will not revoke my </p>
<p class="poetry">decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">They ripped through Gilead like threshing sledges with iron teeth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> So I will set Hazael’s house on fire;</p>
<p class="poetry">fire will consume Ben Hadad’s fortresses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> I will break the bar on the gate of Damascus.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will remove the ruler from Wicked Valley, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who holds the royal scepter from Beth Eden. </p>
<p class="poetry">The people of Aram will be deported to Kir.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:6</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because Gaza has committed three crimes —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four! —I will not revoke my decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">They deported a whole community and sold them to Edom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> So I will set Gaza’s city wall on fire;</p>
<p class="poetry">fire will consume her fortresses. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> I will remove the ruler from Ashdod, </p>
<p class="poetry">the one who holds the royal scepter from Ashkelon. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will strike Ekron with my hand; </p>
<p class="poetry">the rest of the Philistines will also die.” </p>
<p class="poetry">The Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:9</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because Tyre has committed three crimes —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four —I will not revoke my decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">They sold a whole community to Edom;</p>
<p class="poetry">they failed to observe a treaty of brotherhood. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> So I will set fire to Tyre’s city wall; </p>
<p class="poetry">fire will consume her fortresses.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:11</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because Edom has committed three crimes —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four —I will not revoke my decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">He chased his brother with a sword;</p>
<p class="poetry">he wiped out his allies. </p>
<p class="poetry">In his anger he tore them apart without stopping to rest; </p>
<p class="poetry">in his fury he relentlessly attacked them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> So I will set Teman on fire;</p>
<p class="poetry">fire will consume Bozrah’s fortresses.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:13</span> This is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Because the Ammonites have committed three crimes —</p>
<p class="poetry">make that four —I will not revoke my decree of judgment. </p>
<p class="poetry">They ripped open Gilead’s pregnant women </p>
<p class="poetry">so they could expand their territory. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> So I will set fire to Rabbah’s city wall; </p>
<p class="poetry">fire will consume her fortresses.</p>
<p class="poetry">War cries will be heard on the day of battle; </p>
<p class="poetry">a strong gale will blow on the day of the windstorm. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> Ammon’s king will be deported; </p>
<p class="poetry">he and his officials will be carried off together.”</p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken</p>

</body>
</html>