<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 86</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 86</h2><p class="psasuper">A prayer of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:1</span> Listen, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Answer me.</p>
<p class="poetry">For I am oppressed and needy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:2</span> Protect me, for I am loyal.</p>
<p class="poetry">You are my God; deliver your servant who trusts in you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:3</span> Have mercy on me, O Lord,</p>
<p class="poetry">for I cry out to you all day long.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:4</span> Make your servant glad,</p>
<p class="poetry">for to you, O Lord, I pray. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:5</span> Certainly, O Lord, you are kind and forgiving,</p>
<p class="poetry">and show great faithfulness to all who cry out to you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:6</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, hear my prayer.</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention to my plea for mercy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:7</span> In my time of trouble I cry out to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">for you will answer me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:8</span> None can compare to you among the gods, O Lord.</p>
<p class="poetry">Your exploits are incomparable. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:9</span> All the nations, whom you created,</p>
<p class="poetry">will come and worship you, O Lord.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will honor your name. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:10</span> For you are great and do amazing things.</p>
<p class="poetry">You alone are God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:11</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, teach me how you want me to live. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then I will obey your commands. </p>
<p class="poetry">Make me wholeheartedly committed to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:12</span> O Lord, my God, I will give you thanks with my whole heart.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will honor your name continually. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:13</span> For you will extend your great loyal love to me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will deliver my life from the depths of Sheol. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:14</span> O God, arrogant men attack me; </p>
<p class="poetry">a gang of ruthless men, who do not respect you, seek my life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:15</span> But you, O Lord, are a compassionate and merciful God.</p>
<p class="poetry">You are patient and demonstrate great loyal love and faithfulness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:16</span> Turn toward me and have mercy on me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Give your servant your strength.</p>
<p class="poetry">Deliver this son of your female servant. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">86:17</span> Show me evidence of your favor. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then those who hate me will see it and be ashamed, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, will help me and comfort me. </p>

</body>
</html>