<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Purification of a Woman after Childbirth </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">12:2</span> “Tell the Israelites, ‘When a woman produces offspring and bears a male child, she will be unclean seven days, as she is unclean during the days of her menstruation. <span class="verse">12:3</span> On the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin must be circumcised. <span class="verse">12:4</span> Then she will remain thirty-three days in blood purity. She must not touch anything holy and she must not enter the sanctuary until the days of her purification are fulfilled. <span class="verse">12:5</span> If she bears a female child, she will be impure fourteen days as during her menstrual flow, and she will remain sixty-six days in blood purity. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:6</span> “‘When the days of her purification are completed for a son or for a daughter, she must bring a one-year-old lamb for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or turtledove for a sin offering to the entrance of the Meeting Tent, to the priest. <span class="verse">12:7</span> The priest is to present it before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and make atonement on her behalf, and she will be clean from her flow of blood. This is the law of the one who bears a child, for the male or the female child. <span class="verse">12:8</span> If she cannot afford a sheep, then she must take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one for a burnt offering and one for a sin offering, and the priest is to make atonement on her behalf, and she will be clean.’” </p>

</body>
</html>