<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Chronicles 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Chronicles<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warriors Who Joined David at Ziklag</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> These were the men who joined David in Ziklag, when he was banished from the presence of Saul son of Kish. (They were among the warriors who assisted him in battle. <span class="verse">12:2</span> They were armed with bows and could shoot arrows or sling stones right or left-handed. They were fellow tribesmen of Saul from Benjamin.) These were: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:3</span> Ahiezer, the leader, and Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; Jeziel and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; Berachah, Jehu the Anathothite, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:4</span> Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, one of the thirty warriors and their leader, (12:5) Jeremiah, Jahaziel, Johanan, Jozabad the Gederathite, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:5</span> (12:6) Eluzai, Jerimoth, Bealiah, Shemariah, Shephatiah the Haruphite, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:6</span> Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, who were Korahites, </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:7</span> and Joelah and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham from Gedor. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:8</span> Some of the Gadites joined David at the stronghold in the wilderness. They were warriors who were trained for battle; they carried shields and spears. They were as fierce as lions and could run as quickly as gazelles across the hills. <span class="verse">12:9</span> Ezer was the leader, Obadiah the second in command, Eliab the third, <span class="verse">12:10</span> Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, <span class="verse">12:11</span> Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh, <span class="verse">12:12</span> Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth, <span class="verse">12:13</span> Jeremiah the tenth, and Machbannai the eleventh. <span class="verse">12:14</span> These Gadites were military leaders; the least led a hundred men, the greatest a thousand. <span class="verse">12:15</span> They crossed the Jordan River in the first month, when it was overflowing its banks, and routed those living in all the valleys to the east and west. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:16</span> Some from Benjamin and Judah also came to David’s stronghold. <span class="verse">12:17</span> David went out to meet them and said, “If you come to me in peace and want to help me, then I will make an alliance with you. But if you come to betray me to my enemies when I have not harmed you, may the God of our ancestors take notice and judge!” <span class="verse">12:18</span> But a spirit empowered Amasai, the leader of the group of warriors known as the Thirty, and he said: </p>
<p class="bodytext">“We are yours, O David! </p>
<p class="bodytext">We support you, O son of Jesse! </p>
<p class="bodytext">May you greatly prosper. </p>
<p class="bodytext">May those who help you prosper. </p>
<p class="bodytext">Indeed your God helps you!”</p>
<p class="bodytext">So David accepted them and made them leaders of raiding bands. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:19</span> Some men from Manasseh joined David when he went with the Philistines to fight against Saul. (But in the end they did not help the Philistines because, after taking counsel, the Philistine lords sent David away, saying, “It would be disastrous for us if he deserts to his master Saul.”) <span class="verse">12:20</span> When David went to Ziklag, the men of Manasseh who joined him were Adnach, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, leaders of 1,000 soldiers each in the tribe of Manasseh. <span class="verse">12:21</span> They helped David fight against raiding bands, for all of them were warriors and leaders in the army. <span class="verse">12:22</span> Each day men came to help David until his army became very large. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Support for David in Hebron</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:23</span> The following is a record of the armed warriors who came with their leaders and joined David in Hebron in order to make David king in Saul’s place, in accordance with the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s decree: </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:24</span> From Judah came 6,800 trained warriors carrying shields and spears. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:25</span> From Simeon there were 7,100 warriors.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:26</span> From Levi there were 4,600. <span class="verse">12:27</span> Jehoiada, the leader of Aaron’s descendants, brought 3,700 men with him, <span class="verse">12:28</span> along with Zadok, a young warrior, and 22 leaders from his family. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:29</span> From Benjamin, Saul’s tribe, there were 3,000, most of whom, up to that time, had been loyal to Saul. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:30</span> From Ephraim there were 20,800 warriors, who had brought fame to their families. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:31</span> From the half-tribe of Manasseh there were 18,000 who had been designated by name to come and make David king. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:32</span> From Issachar there were 200 leaders and all their relatives at their command—they understood the times and knew what Israel should do. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:33</span> From Zebulun there were 50,000 warriors who were prepared for battle, equipped with all kinds of weapons, and ready to give their undivided loyalty. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:34</span> From Naphtali there were 1,000 officers, along with 37,000 men carrying shields and spears. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:35</span> From Dan there were 28,600 men prepared for battle. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:36</span> From Asher there were 40,000 warriors prepared for battle. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:37</span> From the other side of the Jordan, from Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, there were 120,000 men armed with all kinds of weapons. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:38</span> All these men were warriors who were ready to march. They came to Hebron to make David king over all Israel by acclamation; all the rest of the Israelites also were in agreement that David should become king. <span class="verse">12:39</span> They spent three days feasting there with David, for their relatives had given them provisions. <span class="verse">12:40</span> Also their neighbors, from as far away as Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali, were bringing food on donkeys, camels, mules, and oxen. There were large supplies of flour, fig cakes, raisins, wine, olive oil, beef, and lamb, for Israel was celebrating. </p>

</body>
</html>