<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ignorance of the Future Demands Diligence in the Present</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:1</span> Send your grain overseas, </p>
<p class="poetry">for after many days you will get a return. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:2</span> Divide your merchandise among seven or even eight investments, </p>
<p class="poetry">for you do not know what calamity may happen on earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:3</span> If the clouds are full of rain, they will empty themselves on the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">and whether a tree falls to the south or to the north, the tree will lie wherever it falls. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:4</span> He who watches the wind will not sow,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he who observes the clouds will not reap. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:5</span> Just as you do not know the path of the wind,</p>
<p class="poetry">or how the bones form in the womb of a pregnant woman, </p>
<p class="poetry">so you do not know the work of God who makes everything. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:6</span> Sow your seed in the morning,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not stop working until the evening; </p>
<p class="poetry">for you do not know which activity will succeed —</p>
<p class="poetry">whether this one or that one, or whether both will prosper equally. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Life Should Be Enjoyed Because Death is Inevitable</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:7</span> Light is sweet, </p>
<p class="poetry">and it is pleasant for a person to see the sun. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:8</span> So, if a man lives many years, let him rejoice in them all,</p>
<p class="poetry">but let him remember that the days of darkness will be many—all that is about to come is obscure. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Enjoy Life to the Fullest under the Fear of God</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:9</span> Rejoice, young man, while you are young, </p>
<p class="poetry">and let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth.</p>
<p class="poetry">Follow the impulses of your heart and the desires of your eyes,</p>
<p class="poetry">but know that God will judge your motives and actions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">11:10</span> Banish emotional stress from your mind. </p>
<p class="poetry">and put away pain from your body; </p>
<p class="poetry">for youth and the prime of life are fleeting. </p>

</body>
</html>