<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Jerusalem</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:1</span> This is an oracle about the Valley of Vision: </p>
<p class="poetry">What is the reason </p>
<p class="poetry">that all of you go up to the rooftops? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:2</span> The noisy city is full of raucous sounds;</p>
<p class="poetry">the town is filled with revelry. </p>
<p class="poetry">Your slain were not cut down by the sword;</p>
<p class="poetry">they did not die in battle. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:3</span>  All your leaders ran away together—</p>
<p class="poetry">they fled to a distant place;</p>
<p class="poetry">all your refugees were captured together—</p>
<p class="poetry">they were captured without a single arrow being shot. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:4</span> So I say:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Don’t look at me! </p>
<p class="poetry">I am weeping bitterly.</p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t try to console me</p>
<p class="poetry">concerning the destruction of my defenseless people.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:5</span> For the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies,</p>
<p class="poetry">has planned a day of panic, defeat, and confusion. </p>
<p class="poetry">In the Valley of Vision people shout </p>
<p class="poetry">and cry out to the hill. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:6</span> The Elamites picked up the quiver,</p>
<p class="poetry">and came with chariots and horsemen; </p>
<p class="poetry">the men of Kir prepared the shield. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:7</span> Your very best valleys were full of chariots; </p>
<p class="poetry">horsemen confidently took their positions at the gate. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:8</span> They removed the defenses of Judah.</p>
<p class="poetry">At that time you looked</p>
<p class="poetry">for the weapons in the House of the Forest. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:9</span> You saw the many breaks</p>
<p class="poetry">in the walls of the City of David; </p>
<p class="poetry">you stored up water in the lower pool. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:10</span> You counted the houses in Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry">and demolished houses so you could have material to reinforce the wall. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:11</span> You made a reservoir between the two walls</p>
<p class="poetry">for the water of the old pool—</p>
<p class="poetry">but you did not trust in the one who made it; </p>
<p class="poetry">you did not depend on the one who formed it long ago. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:12</span> At that time the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies called for weeping and mourning,</p>
<p class="poetry">for shaved heads and sackcloth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:13</span> But look, there is outright celebration! </p>
<p class="poetry">You say, “Kill the ox and slaughter the sheep,</p>
<p class="poetry">eat meat and drink wine.</p>
<p class="poetry">Eat and drink, for tomorrow we die!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:14</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies told me this: “Certainly this sin will not be forgiven as long as you live,” says the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:15</span> This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Go visit this administrator, Shebna, who supervises the palace, and tell him: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:16</span> ‘What right do you have to be here? What relatives do you have buried here? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why do you chisel out a tomb for yourself here?</p>
<p class="poetry">He chisels out his burial site in an elevated place,</p>
<p class="poetry">he carves out his tomb on a cliff. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:17</span> Look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will throw you far away, you mere man! </p>
<p class="poetry">He will wrap you up tightly. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:18</span> He will wind you up tightly into a ball</p>
<p class="poetry">and throw you into a wide, open land. </p>
<p class="poetry">There you will die,</p>
<p class="poetry">and there with you will be your impressive chariots, </p>
<p class="poetry">which bring disgrace to the house of your master. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:19</span> I will remove you from your office;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will be thrown down from your position. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:20</span> “‘At that time I will summon my servant Eliakim, son of Hilkiah. <span class="verse">22:21</span> I will put your robe on him, tie your belt around him, and transfer your authority to him. He will become a protector of the residents of Jerusalem and of the people of Judah. <span class="verse">22:22</span> I will place the key to the house of David on his shoulder. When he opens the door, no one can close it; when he closes the door, no one can open it. <span class="verse">22:23</span> I will fasten him like a peg into a solid place; he will bring honor and respect to his father’s family. <span class="verse">22:24</span> His father’s family will gain increasing prominence because of him, including the offspring and the offshoots. All the small containers, including the bowls and all the jars, will hang from this peg.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:25</span> “At that time,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, “the peg fastened into a solid place will come loose. It will be cut off and fall, and the load hanging on it will be cut off.” Indeed, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has spoken. </p>

</body>
</html>