<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Colossians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Colossians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortations to Seek the Things Above</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Therefore, if you have been raised with Christ, keep seeking the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. <span class="verse">3:2</span> Keep thinking about things above, not things on the earth, <span class="verse">3:3</span> for you have died and your life is hidden with Christ in God. <span class="verse">3:4</span> When Christ (who is your life) appears, then you too will be revealed in glory with him. <span class="verse">3:5</span> So put to death whatever in your nature belongs to the earth: sexual immorality, impurity, shameful passion, evil desire, and greed which is idolatry. <span class="verse">3:6</span> Because of these things the wrath of God is coming on the sons of disobedience. <span class="verse">3:7</span> You also lived your lives in this way at one time, when you used to live among them. <span class="verse">3:8</span> But now, put off all such things as anger, rage, malice, slander, abusive language from your mouth. <span class="verse">3:9</span> Do not lie to one another since you have put off the old man with its practices <span class="verse">3:10</span> and have been clothed with the new man that is being renewed in knowledge according to the image of the one who created it. <span class="verse">3:11</span> Here there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all and in all. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Unity and Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Therefore, as the elect of God, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with a heart of mercy, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience, <span class="verse">3:13</span> bearing with one another and forgiving one another, if someone happens to have a complaint against anyone else. Just as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also forgive others. <span class="verse">3:14</span> And to all these virtues add love, which is the perfect bond. <span class="verse">3:15</span> Let the peace of Christ be in control in your heart (for you were in fact called as one body to this peace), and be thankful. <span class="verse">3:16</span> Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and exhorting one another with all wisdom, singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, all with grace in your hearts to God. <span class="verse">3:17</span> And whatever you do in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him. </p>

</body>
</html>