<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Job’s Reply to Zophar </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> Then Job answered: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:2</span> “Without a doubt you are the people, </p>
<p class="poetry">and wisdom will die with you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:3</span> I also have understanding as well as you;</p>
<p class="poetry">I am not inferior to you. </p>
<p class="poetry">Who does not know such things as these? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:4</span> I am a laughingstock to my friends, </p>
<p class="poetry">I, who called on God and whom he answered —</p>
<p class="poetry">a righteous and blameless man </p>
<p class="poetry">is a laughingstock! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:5</span> For calamity, there is derision </p>
<p class="poetry">(according to the ideas of the fortunate)—</p>
<p class="poetry">a fate for those whose feet slip. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:6</span> But the tents of robbers are peaceful,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those who provoke God are confident —</p>
<p class="poetry">who carry their god in their hands. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Knowledge of God’s Wisdom </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:7</span> “But now, ask the animals and they will teach you,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the birds of the sky and they will tell you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:8</span> Or speak to the earth and it will teach you,</p>
<p class="poetry">or let the fish of the sea declare to you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:9</span> Which of all these does not know</p>
<p class="poetry">that the hand of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has done this? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:10</span> In his hand is the life of every creature</p>
<p class="poetry">and the breath of all the human race. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:11</span> Does not the ear test words,</p>
<p class="poetry">as the tongue tastes food? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:12</span> Is not wisdom found among the aged? </p>
<p class="poetry">Does not long life bring understanding? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:13</span> “With God are wisdom and power;</p>
<p class="poetry">counsel and understanding are his. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:14</span> If he tears down, it cannot be rebuilt;</p>
<p class="poetry">if he imprisons a person, there is no escape. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:15</span> If he holds back the waters, then they dry up; </p>
<p class="poetry">if he releases them, they destroy the land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:16</span> With him are strength and prudence; </p>
<p class="poetry">both the one who goes astray </p>
<p class="poetry">and the one who misleads are his.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:17</span> He leads counselors away stripped </p>
<p class="poetry">and makes judges into fools. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:18</span> He loosens the bonds of kings</p>
<p class="poetry">and binds a loincloth around their waist. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:19</span> He leads priests away stripped </p>
<p class="poetry">and overthrows the potentates. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:20</span> He deprives the trusted advisers of speech </p>
<p class="poetry">and takes away the discernment of elders. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:21</span> He pours contempt on noblemen</p>
<p class="poetry">and disarms the powerful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:22</span> He reveals the deep things of darkness,</p>
<p class="poetry">and brings deep shadows into the light. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:23</span> He makes nations great, and destroys them;</p>
<p class="poetry">he extends the boundaries of nations</p>
<p class="poetry">and disperses them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:24</span> He deprives the leaders of the earth </p>
<p class="poetry">of their understanding; </p>
<p class="poetry">he makes them wander </p>
<p class="poetry">in a trackless desert waste. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">12:25</span> They grope about in darkness without light;</p>
<p class="poetry">he makes them stagger like drunkards. </p>

</body>
</html>