<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Child is Born for a Sign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told me, “Take a large tablet and inscribe these words on it with an ordinary stylus: ‘Maher Shalal Hash Baz.’ <span class="verse">8:2</span> Then I will summon as my reliable witnesses Uriah the priest and Zechariah son of Jeberekiah.” <span class="verse">8:3</span> I then approached the prophetess for marital relations; she conceived and gave birth to a son. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told me, “Name him Maher Shalal Hash Baz, <span class="verse">8:4</span> for before the child knows how to cry out ‘My father’ or ‘My mother,’ the wealth of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria will be carried off by the king of Assyria.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:5</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to me again: <span class="verse">8:6</span> “These people have rejected the gently flowing waters of Shiloah and melt in fear over Rezin and the son of Remaliah. <span class="verse">8:7</span> So look, the Lord is bringing up against them the turbulent and mighty waters of the Euphrates River —the king of Assyria and all his majestic power. It will reach flood stage and overflow its banks. <span class="verse">8:8</span> It will spill into Judah, flooding and engulfing, as it reaches to the necks of its victims. He will spread his wings out over your entire land, O Immanuel.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> You will be broken, O nations; </p>
<p class="poetry">you will be shattered! </p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention, all you distant lands of the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">Get ready for battle, and you will be shattered!</p>
<p class="poetry">Get ready for battle, and you will be shattered! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> Devise your strategy, but it will be thwarted. </p>
<p class="poetry">Issue your orders, but they will not be executed! </p>
<p class="poetry">For God is with us! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Encourages Isaiah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:11</span> Indeed this is what the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told me quite forcefully. He warned me not to act like these people: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> “Do not say, ‘Conspiracy,’ every time these people say the word. </p>
<p class="poetry">Don’t be afraid of what scares them; don’t be terrified. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:13</span> You must recognize the authority of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies. </p>
<p class="poetry">He is the one you must respect; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is the one you must fear. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:14</span> He will become a sanctuary, </p>
<p class="poetry">but a stone that makes a person trip, </p>
<p class="poetry">and a rock that makes one stumble—</p>
<p class="poetry">to the two houses of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will become a trap and a snare</p>
<p class="poetry">to the residents of Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:15</span> Many will stumble over the stone and the rock, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will fall and be seriously injured,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will be ensnared and captured.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:16</span> Tie up the scroll as legal evidence, </p>
<p class="poetry">seal the official record of God’s instructions and give it to my followers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:17</span> I will wait patiently for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">who has rejected the family of Jacob; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will wait for him.</p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">8:18</span> Look, I and the sons whom the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has given me are reminders and object lessons in Israel, sent from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies, who lives on Mount Zion. </p>

</body>
</html>