<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 147</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 147</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:1</span> Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">for it is good to sing praises to our God.</p>
<p class="poetry">Yes, praise is pleasant and appropriate. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:2</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rebuilds Jerusalem, </p>
<p class="poetry">and gathers the exiles of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:3</span> He heals the brokenhearted,</p>
<p class="poetry">and bandages their wounds. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:4</span> He counts the number of the stars;</p>
<p class="poetry">he names all of them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:5</span> Our Lord is great and has awesome power; </p>
<p class="poetry">there is no limit to his wisdom. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:6</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> lifts up the oppressed,</p>
<p class="poetry">but knocks the wicked to the ground. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:7</span> Offer to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> a song of thanks. </p>
<p class="poetry">Sing praises to our God to the accompaniment of a harp. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:8</span> He covers the sky with clouds,</p>
<p class="poetry">provides the earth with rain,</p>
<p class="poetry">and causes grass to grow on the hillsides. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:9</span> He gives food to the animals,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to the young ravens when they chirp. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:10</span> He is not enamored with the strength of a horse,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor is he impressed by the warrior’s strong legs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> takes delight in his faithful followers, </p>
<p class="poetry">and in those who wait for his loyal love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:12</span> Extol the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, O Jerusalem.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise your God, O Zion. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:13</span> For he makes the bars of your gates strong.</p>
<p class="poetry">He blesses your children within you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:14</span> He brings peace to your territory. </p>
<p class="poetry">He abundantly provides for you the best grain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:15</span> He sends his command through the earth; </p>
<p class="poetry">swiftly his order reaches its destination. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:16</span> He sends the snow that is white like wool;</p>
<p class="poetry">he spreads the frost that is white like ashes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:17</span> He throws his hailstones like crumbs.</p>
<p class="poetry">Who can withstand the cold wind he sends? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:18</span> He then orders it all to melt; </p>
<p class="poetry">he breathes on it, and the water flows. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:19</span> He proclaims his word to Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">his statutes and regulations to Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">147:20</span> He has not done so with any other nation;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are not aware of his regulations.</p>
<p class="poetry">Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>

</body>
</html>