<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 21</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, the king rejoices in the strength you give; </p>
<p class="poetry">he takes great delight in the deliverance you provide. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:2</span> You grant him his heart’s desire;</p>
<p class="poetry">you do not refuse his request. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:3</span> For you bring him rich blessings; </p>
<p class="poetry">you place a golden crown on his head. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:4</span> He asked you to sustain his life, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you have granted him long life and an enduring dynasty. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:5</span> Your deliverance brings him great honor; </p>
<p class="poetry">you give him majestic splendor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:6</span> For you grant him lasting blessings;</p>
<p class="poetry">you give him great joy by allowing him into your presence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:7</span> For the king trusts in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">and because of the Most High’s faithfulness he is not shaken. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:8</span> You prevail over all your enemies;</p>
<p class="poetry">your power is too great for those who hate you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:9</span> You burn them up like a fiery furnace when you appear. </p>
<p class="poetry">The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> angrily devours them; </p>
<p class="poetry">the fire consumes them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:10</span> You destroy their offspring from the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">their descendants from among the human race. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:11</span> Yes, they intend to do you harm; </p>
<p class="poetry">they dream up a scheme, but they do not succeed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:12</span> For you make them retreat </p>
<p class="poetry">when you aim your arrows at them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">21:13</span> Rise up, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, in strength! </p>
<p class="poetry">We will sing and praise your power. </p>

</body>
</html>