<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 71</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 71</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:1</span> In you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I have taken shelter.</p>
<p class="poetry">Never let me be humiliated. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:2</span> Vindicate me by rescuing me. </p>
<p class="poetry">Listen to me. Deliver me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:3</span> Be my protector and refuge, </p>
<p class="poetry">a stronghold where I can be safe. </p>
<p class="poetry">For you are my high ridge and my stronghold. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:4</span> My God, rescue me from the power of the wicked,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the hand of the cruel oppressor. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:5</span> For you are my hope; </p>
<p class="poetry">O Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I have trusted in you since I was young. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:6</span> I have leaned on you since birth; </p>
<p class="poetry">you pulled me from my mother’s womb.</p>
<p class="poetry">I praise you continually. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:7</span> Many are appalled when they see me, </p>
<p class="poetry">but you are my secure shelter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:8</span> I praise you constantly</p>
<p class="poetry">and speak of your splendor all day long. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:9</span> Do not reject me in my old age. </p>
<p class="poetry">When my strength fails, do not abandon me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:10</span> For my enemies talk about me;</p>
<p class="poetry">those waiting for a chance to kill me plot my demise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:11</span> They say, “God has abandoned him.</p>
<p class="poetry">Run and seize him, for there is no one who will rescue him.”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:12</span> O God, do not remain far away from me.</p>
<p class="poetry">My God, hurry and help me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:13</span> May my accusers be humiliated and defeated.</p>
<p class="poetry">May those who want to harm me be covered with scorn and disgrace. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:14</span> As for me, I will wait continually,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will continue to praise you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:15</span> I will tell about your justice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all day long proclaim your salvation, </p>
<p class="poetry">though I cannot fathom its full extent. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:16</span> I will come and tell about the mighty acts of the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will proclaim your justice—yours alone. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:17</span> O God, you have taught me since I was young,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I am still declaring your amazing deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:18</span> Even when I am old and gray, </p>
<p class="poetry">O God, do not abandon me,</p>
<p class="poetry">until I tell the next generation about your strength,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those coming after me about your power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:19</span> Your justice, O God, extends to the skies above; </p>
<p class="poetry">you have done great things. </p>
<p class="poetry">O God, who can compare to you? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:20</span> Though you have allowed me to experience much trouble and distress, </p>
<p class="poetry">revive me once again. </p>
<p class="poetry">Bring me up once again from the depths of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:21</span> Raise me to a position of great honor. </p>
<p class="poetry">Turn and comfort me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:22</span> I will express my thanks to you with a stringed instrument,</p>
<p class="poetry">praising your faithfulness, O my God.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will sing praises to you accompanied by a harp,</p>
<p class="poetry">O Holy One of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:23</span> My lips will shout for joy. Yes, I will sing your praises.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will praise you when you rescue me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">71:24</span> All day long my tongue will also tell about your justice,</p>
<p class="poetry">for those who want to harm me will be embarrassed and ashamed. </p>

</body>
</html>