<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Micah 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Micah<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Land Robbers Will Lose Their Land</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Beware wicked schemers, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who devise calamity as they lie in bed. </p>
<p class="poetry">As soon as morning dawns they carry out their plans, </p>
<p class="poetry">because they have the power to do so.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> They confiscate the fields they desire</p>
<p class="poetry">and seize the houses they want. </p>
<p class="poetry">They defraud people of their homes </p>
<p class="poetry">and deprive people of the land they have inherited. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:3</span> Therefore the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says this: </p>
<p class="poetry">“Look, I am devising disaster for this nation! </p>
<p class="poetry">It will be like a yoke from which you cannot free your neck. </p>
<p class="poetry">You will no longer walk proudly, </p>
<p class="poetry">for it will be a time of catastrophe. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> In that day people will sing this taunt song to you—</p>
<p class="poetry">they will mock you with this lament: </p>
<p class="poetry">‘We are completely destroyed;</p>
<p class="poetry">they sell off the property of my people.</p>
<p class="poetry">How they remove it from me! </p>
<p class="poetry">They assign our fields to the conqueror.’” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> Therefore no one will assign you land in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s community. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">2:6</span> “Don’t preach with such impassioned rhetoric,” they say excitedly. </p>
<p class="poetry">“These prophets should not preach of such things;</p>
<p class="poetry">we will not be overtaken by humiliation.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> Does the family of Jacob say, </p>
<p class="poetry">“The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s patience can’t be exhausted—</p>
<p class="poetry">he would never do such things”? </p>
<p class="poetry">To be sure, my commands bring a reward</p>
<p class="poetry">for those who obey them, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> but you rise up as an enemy against my people. </p>
<p class="poetry">You steal a robe from a friend, </p>
<p class="poetry">from those who pass by peacefully as if returning from a war. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> You wrongly evict widows among my people from their cherished homes.</p>
<p class="poetry">You defraud their children of their prized inheritance. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> But you are the ones who will be forced to leave! </p>
<p class="poetry">For this land is not secure; </p>
<p class="poetry">sin will thoroughly destroy it! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> If a lying windbag should come and say, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘I’ll promise you blessings of wine and beer,’ </p>
<p class="poetry">he would be just the right preacher for these people! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Restore His People</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> “I will certainly gather all of you, O Jacob,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will certainly assemble those Israelites who remain. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will bring them together like sheep in a fold, </p>
<p class="poetry">like a flock in the middle of a pasture; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will be so numerous that they will make a lot of noise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> The one who can break through barriers will lead them out; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will break out, pass through the gate, and leave. </p>
<p class="poetry">Their king will advance before them;</p>
<p class="poetry">the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> himself will lead them.” </p>

</body>
</html>