<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 55</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 55</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Gives an Invitation</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:1</span> “Hey, all who are thirsty, come to the water!</p>
<p class="poetry">You who have no money, come! </p>
<p class="poetry">Buy and eat!</p>
<p class="poetry">Come! Buy wine and milk</p>
<p class="poetry">without money and without cost. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:2</span> Why pay money for something that will not nourish you? </p>
<p class="poetry">Why spend your hard-earned money on something that will not satisfy?</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen carefully to me and eat what is nourishing! </p>
<p class="poetry">Enjoy fine food. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:3</span> Pay attention and come to me.</p>
<p class="poetry">Listen, so you can live. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then I will make an unconditional covenantal promise to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">just like the reliable covenantal promises I made to David. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:4</span> Look, I made him a witness to nations, </p>
<p class="poetry">a ruler and commander of nations.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:5</span> Look, you will summon nations you did not previously know;</p>
<p class="poetry">nations that did not previously know you will run to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God,</p>
<p class="poetry">the Holy One of Israel, </p>
<p class="poetry">for he bestows honor on you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:6</span> Seek the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> while he makes himself available; </p>
<p class="poetry">call to him while he is nearby! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:7</span> The wicked need to abandon their lifestyle </p>
<p class="poetry">and sinful people their plans. </p>
<p class="poetry">They should return to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, and he will show mercy to them, </p>
<p class="poetry">and to their God, for he will freely forgive them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:8</span> “Indeed, my plans are not like your plans,</p>
<p class="poetry">and my deeds are not like your deeds,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:9</span> “for just as the sky is higher than the earth,</p>
<p class="poetry">so my deeds are superior to your deeds</p>
<p class="poetry">and my plans superior to your plans. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:10</span>  The rain and snow fall from the sky</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not return,</p>
<p class="poetry">but instead water the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">and make it produce and yield crops,</p>
<p class="poetry">and provide seed for the planter and food for those who must eat. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:11</span> In the same way, the promise that I make</p>
<p class="poetry">does not return to me, having accomplished nothing. </p>
<p class="poetry">No, it is realized as I desire</p>
<p class="poetry">and is fulfilled as I intend.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:12</span> Indeed you will go out with joy;</p>
<p class="poetry">you will be led along in peace;</p>
<p class="poetry">the mountains and hills will give a joyful shout before you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and all the trees in the field will clap their hands. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">55:13</span> Evergreens will grow in place of thorn bushes,</p>
<p class="poetry">firs will grow in place of nettles;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will be a monument to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">a permanent reminder that will remain. </p>

</body>
</html>