<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 96</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 96</h2><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:1</span> Sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> a new song. </p>
<p class="poetry">Sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, all the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:2</span> Sing to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Praise his name.</p>
<p class="poetry">Announce every day how he delivers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:3</span> Tell the nations about his splendor.</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell all the nations about his amazing deeds.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:4</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is great and certainly worthy of praise;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is more awesome than all gods. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:5</span> For all the gods of the nations are worthless, </p>
<p class="poetry">but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> made the sky. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:6</span> Majestic splendor emanates from him; </p>
<p class="poetry">his sanctuary is firmly established and beautiful. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:7</span> Ascribe to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, O families of the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">ascribe to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> splendor and strength. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:8</span> Ascribe to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> the splendor he deserves. </p>
<p class="poetry">Bring an offering and enter his courts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:9</span> Worship the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in holy attire. </p>
<p class="poetry">Tremble before him, all the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:10</span> Say among the nations, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> reigns!</p>
<p class="poetry">The world is established; it cannot be moved.</p>
<p class="poetry">He judges the nations fairly.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:11</span> Let the sky rejoice, and the earth be happy.</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the sea and everything in it shout.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:12</span> Let the fields and everything in them celebrate.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then let the trees of the forest shout with joy</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">96:13</span> before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, for he comes.</p>
<p class="poetry">For he comes to judge the earth.</p>
<p class="poetry">He judges the world fairly, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the nations in accordance with his justice. </p>

</body>
</html>