<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 22</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the tune “Morning Doe”; a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:1</span> My God, my God, why have you abandoned me? </p>
<p class="poetry">I groan in prayer, but help seems far away. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:2</span> My God, I cry out during the day,</p>
<p class="poetry">but you do not answer,</p>
<p class="poetry">and during the night my prayers do not let up. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:3</span> You are holy;</p>
<p class="poetry">you sit as king receiving the praises of Israel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:4</span> In you our ancestors trusted;</p>
<p class="poetry">they trusted in you and you rescued them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:5</span> To you they cried out, and they were saved;</p>
<p class="poetry">in you they trusted and they were not disappointed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:6</span> But I am a worm, not a man; </p>
<p class="poetry">people insult me and despise me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:7</span> All who see me taunt me;</p>
<p class="poetry">they mock me and shake their heads. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:8</span> They say, </p>
<p class="poetry">“Commit yourself to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rescue him!</p>
<p class="poetry">Let the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> deliver him, for he delights in him.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:9</span> Yes, you are the one who brought me out from the womb</p>
<p class="poetry">and made me feel secure on my mother’s breasts. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:10</span> I have been dependent on you since birth; </p>
<p class="poetry">from the time I came out of my mother’s womb you have been my God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:11</span> Do not remain far away from me,</p>
<p class="poetry">for trouble is near and I have no one to help me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:12</span> Many bulls surround me;</p>
<p class="poetry">powerful bulls of Bashan hem me in.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:13</span> They open their mouths to devour me </p>
<p class="poetry">like a roaring lion that rips its prey. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:14</span> My strength drains away like water; </p>
<p class="poetry">all my bones are dislocated.</p>
<p class="poetry">My heart is like wax;</p>
<p class="poetry">it melts away inside me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:15</span> The roof of my mouth is as dry as a piece of pottery;</p>
<p class="poetry">my tongue sticks to my gums. </p>
<p class="poetry">You set me in the dust of death. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:16</span> Yes, wild dogs surround me—</p>
<p class="poetry">a gang of evil men crowd around me;</p>
<p class="poetry">like a lion they pin my hands and feet. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:17</span> I can count all my bones;</p>
<p class="poetry">my enemies are gloating over me in triumph. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:18</span> They are dividing up my clothes among themselves;</p>
<p class="poetry">they are rolling dice for my garments. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:19</span> But you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do not remain far away.</p>
<p class="poetry">You are my source of strength. Hurry and help me! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:20</span> Deliver me from the sword.</p>
<p class="poetry">Save my life from the claws of the wild dogs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:21</span> Rescue me from the mouth of the lion, </p>
<p class="poetry">and from the horns of the wild oxen. </p>
<p class="poetry">You have answered me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:22</span> I will declare your name to my countrymen. </p>
<p class="poetry">In the middle of the assembly I will praise you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:23</span> You loyal followers of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, praise him.</p>
<p class="poetry">All you descendants of Jacob, honor him.</p>
<p class="poetry">All you descendants of Israel, stand in awe of him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:24</span> For he did not despise or detest the suffering of the oppressed. </p>
<p class="poetry">He did not ignore him; </p>
<p class="poetry">when he cried out to him, he responded. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:25</span> You are the reason I offer praise in the great assembly;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will fulfill my promises before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s loyal followers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:26</span> Let the oppressed eat and be filled. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let those who seek his help praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">May you live forever! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:27</span> Let all the people of the earth acknowledge the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and turn to him. </p>
<p class="poetry">Let all the nations worship you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:28</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is king </p>
<p class="poetry">and rules over the nations. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:29</span> All the thriving people of the earth will join the celebration and worship; </p>
<p class="poetry">all those who are descending into the grave will bow before him,</p>
<p class="poetry">including those who cannot preserve their lives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:30</span> A whole generation will serve him;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will tell the next generation about the Lord. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:31</span> They will come and tell about his saving deeds; </p>
<p class="poetry">they will tell a future generation what he has accomplished. </p>

</body>
</html>