<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Zephaniah 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zephaniah<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jerusalem is Corrupt</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Beware to the filthy, stained city;</p>
<p class="poetry">the city filled with oppressors! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:2</span> She is disobedient; </p>
<p class="poetry">she has refused correction. </p>
<p class="poetry">She does not trust the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">she has not sought the advice of her God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:3</span> Her princes are as fierce as roaring lions; </p>
<p class="poetry">her rulers are as hungry as wolves in the desert, </p>
<p class="poetry">who completely devour their prey by morning. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:4</span> Her prophets are proud; </p>
<p class="poetry">they are deceitful men.</p>
<p class="poetry">Her priests have defiled what is holy; </p>
<p class="poetry">they have broken God’s laws. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:5</span> The just <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> resides within her;</p>
<p class="poetry">he commits no unjust acts. </p>
<p class="poetry">Every morning he reveals his justice.</p>
<p class="poetry">At dawn he appears without fail. </p>
<p class="poetry">Yet the unjust know no shame. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Judgment will Purify</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:6</span> “I destroyed nations;</p>
<p class="poetry">their walled cities are in ruins.</p>
<p class="poetry">I turned their streets into ruins;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one passes through them.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their cities are desolate; </p>
<p class="poetry">no one lives there. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:7</span> I thought, ‘Certainly you will respect me!</p>
<p class="poetry">Now you will accept correction!’</p>
<p class="poetry">If she had done so, her home would not be destroyed </p>
<p class="poetry">by all the punishments I have threatened. </p>
<p class="poetry">But they eagerly sinned</p>
<p class="poetry">in everything they did. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:8</span> Therefore you must wait patiently for me,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>,</p>
<p class="poetry">“for the day when I attack and take plunder. </p>
<p class="poetry">I have decided to gather nations together</p>
<p class="poetry">and assemble kingdoms,</p>
<p class="poetry">so I can pour out my fury on them—</p>
<p class="poetry">all my raging anger.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the whole earth will be consumed</p>
<p class="poetry">by my fiery anger. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:9</span> Know for sure that I will then enable</p>
<p class="poetry">the nations to give me acceptable praise. </p>
<p class="poetry">All of them will invoke the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s name when they pray, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will worship him in unison. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:10</span> From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, </p>
<p class="poetry">those who pray to me, my dispersed people, </p>
<p class="poetry">will bring me tribute. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:11</span> In that day you will not be ashamed of all your rebelliousness against me, </p>
<p class="poetry">for then I will remove from your midst those who proudly boast, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will never again be arrogant on my holy hill. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:12</span> I will leave in your midst a humble and meek group of people, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they will find safety in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s presence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:13</span> The Israelites who remain will not act deceitfully.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will not lie,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a deceitful tongue will not be found in their mouths.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, they will graze peacefully like sheep and lie down;</p>
<p class="poetry">no one will terrify them.”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:14</span> Shout for joy, Daughter Zion! </p>
<p class="poetry">Shout out, Israel!</p>
<p class="poetry">Be happy and boast with all your heart, Daughter Jerusalem! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:15</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has removed the judgment against you; </p>
<p class="poetry">he has turned back your enemy.</p>
<p class="poetry">Israel’s king, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, is in your midst!</p>
<p class="poetry">You no longer need to fear disaster. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:16</span> On that day they will say to Jerusalem,</p>
<p class="poetry">“Don’t be afraid, Zion!</p>
<p class="poetry">Your hands must not be paralyzed from panic! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:17</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> your God is in your midst;</p>
<p class="poetry">he is a warrior who can deliver.</p>
<p class="poetry">He takes great delight in you; </p>
<p class="poetry">he renews you by his love; </p>
<p class="poetry">he shouts for joy over you.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:18</span> “As for those who grieve because they cannot attend the festivals—</p>
<p class="poetry">I took them away from you;</p>
<p class="poetry">they became tribute and were a source of shame to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:19</span> Look, at that time I will deal with those who mistreated you.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will rescue the lame sheep </p>
<p class="poetry">and gather together the scattered sheep.</p>
<p class="poetry">I will take away their humiliation</p>
<p class="poetry">and make the whole earth admire and respect them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">3:20</span> At that time I will lead you—</p>
<p class="poetry">at the time I gather you together. </p>
<p class="poetry">Be sure of this! I will make all the nations of the earth respect and admire you </p>
<p class="poetry">when you see me restore you,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>