<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Bildad’s First Speech to Job </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Then Bildad the Shuhite spoke up and said: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:2</span> “How long will you speak these things, </p>
<p class="poetry">seeing that the words of your mouth </p>
<p class="poetry">are like a great wind? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:3</span> Does God pervert justice? </p>
<p class="poetry">Or does the Almighty pervert what is right? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:4</span> If your children sinned against him,</p>
<p class="poetry">he gave them over to the penalty of their sin.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:5</span> But if you will look to God,</p>
<p class="poetry">and make your supplication to the Almighty, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:6</span> if you become pure and upright, </p>
<p class="poetry">even now he will rouse himself for you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will restore your righteous home. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:7</span> Your beginning will seem so small,</p>
<p class="poetry">since your future will flourish. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">8:8</span> “For inquire now of the former generation,</p>
<p class="poetry">and pay attention to the findings </p>
<p class="poetry">of their ancestors; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> For we were born yesterday and do not have knowledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">since our days on earth are but a shadow. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> Will they not instruct you and speak to you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and bring forth words </p>
<p class="poetry">from their understanding? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:11</span> Can the papyrus plant grow tall where there is no marsh?</p>
<p class="poetry">Can reeds flourish without water? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> While they are still beginning to flower </p>
<p class="poetry">and not ripe for cutting, </p>
<p class="poetry">they can wither away </p>
<p class="poetry">faster than any grass. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:13</span> Such is the destiny of all who forget God;</p>
<p class="poetry">the hope of the godless perishes, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:14</span> whose trust is in something futile, </p>
<p class="poetry">whose security is a spider’s web. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:15</span> He leans against his house but it does not hold up, </p>
<p class="poetry">he takes hold of it but it does not stand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:16</span> He is a well-watered plant in the sun,</p>
<p class="poetry">its shoots spread over its garden. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:17</span> It wraps its roots around a heap of stones </p>
<p class="poetry">and it looks for a place among stones. </p>
<p class="poetry"></p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:18</span> If he is uprooted from his place,</p>
<p class="poetry">then that place will disown him, saying, </p>
<p class="poetry">‘I have never seen you!’</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:19</span> Indeed, this is the joy of his way, </p>
<p class="poetry">and out of the earth others spring up. </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">8:20</span> “Surely, God does not reject a blameless man, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor does he grasp the hand </p>
<p class="poetry">of the evildoers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:21</span> He will yet fill your mouth with laughter, </p>
<p class="poetry">and your lips with gladness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">8:22</span> Those who hate you will be clothed with shame, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the tent of the wicked will be no more.”</p>

</body>
</html>