<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Philemon 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Philemon<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our dear friend and colaborer, <span class="verse">1:2</span> to Apphia our sister, to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church that meets in your house. <span class="verse">1:3</span> Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Thanks for Philemon’s Love and Faith</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:4</span> I always thank my God as I remember you in my prayers, <span class="verse">1:5</span> because I hear of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints. <span class="verse">1:6</span> I pray that the faith you share with us may deepen your understanding of every blessing that belongs to you in Christ. <span class="verse">1:7</span> I have had great joy and encouragement because of your love, for the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, brother. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Request for Onesimus</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:8</span> So, although I have quite a lot of confidence in Christ and could command you to do what is proper, <span class="verse">1:9</span> I would rather appeal to you on the basis of love—I, Paul, an old man and even now a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus — <span class="verse">1:10</span> I am appealing to you concerning my child, whose spiritual father I have become during my imprisonment, that is, Onesimus, <span class="verse">1:11</span> who was formerly useless to you, but is now useful to you and me. <span class="verse">1:12</span> I have sent him (who is my very heart) back to you. <span class="verse">1:13</span> I wanted to keep him with me so that he could serve me in your place during my imprisonment for the sake of the gospel. <span class="verse">1:14</span> However, without your consent I did not want to do anything, so that your good deed would not be out of compulsion, but from your own willingness. <span class="verse">1:15</span> For perhaps it was for this reason that he was separated from you for a little while, so that you would have him back eternally, <span class="verse">1:16</span> no longer as a slave, but more than a slave, as a dear brother. He is especially so to me, and even more so to you now, both humanly speaking and in the Lord. <span class="verse">1:17</span> Therefore if you regard me as a partner, accept him as you would me. <span class="verse">1:18</span> Now if he has defrauded you of anything or owes you anything, charge what he owes to me. <span class="verse">1:19</span> I, Paul, have written this letter with my own hand: I will repay it. I could also mention that you owe me your very self. <span class="verse">1:20</span> Yes, brother, let me have some benefit from you in the Lord. Refresh my heart in Christ. <span class="verse">1:21</span> Since I was confident that you would obey, I wrote to you, because I knew that you would do even more than what I am asking you to do. <span class="verse">1:22</span> At the same time also, prepare a place for me to stay, for I hope that through your prayers I will be given back to you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concluding Greetings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:23</span> Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you. <span class="verse">1:24</span> Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my colaborers, greet you too. <span class="verse">1:25</span> May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. </p>

</body>
</html>