<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ephesians 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ephesians<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. <span class="verse">6:2</span> “<b><i>Honor your father and mother</i>,</b>” which is the first commandment accompanied by a promise, namely, <span class="verse">6:3</span> “<b><i>that it will go</i></b> <b><i>well with you and that you will live</i></b> <i><b>a long time on the earth</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:4</span> Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but raise them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:5</span> Slaves, obey your human masters with fear and trembling, in the sincerity of your heart, as to Christ, <span class="verse">6:6</span> not like those who do their work only when someone is watching —as people-pleasers—but as slaves of Christ doing the will of God from the heart. <span class="verse">6:7</span> Obey with enthusiasm, as though serving the Lord and not people, <span class="verse">6:8</span> because you know that each person, whether slave or free, if he does something good, this will be rewarded by the Lord. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:9</span> Masters, treat your slaves the same way, giving up the use of threats, because you know that both you and they have the same master in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortations for Spiritual Warfare</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:10</span> Finally, be strengthened in the Lord and in the strength of his power. <span class="verse">6:11</span> Clothe yourselves with the full armor of God, so that you will be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. <span class="verse">6:12</span> For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the powers, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavens. <span class="verse">6:13</span> For this reason, take up the full armor of God so that you may be able to stand your ground on the evil day, and having done everything, to stand. <span class="verse">6:14</span> Stand firm therefore, by fastening the belt of truth around your waist, by putting on the breastplate of righteousness, <span class="verse">6:15</span> by fitting your feet with the preparation that comes from the good news of peace, <span class="verse">6:16</span> and in all of this, by taking up the shield of faith with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one. <span class="verse">6:17</span> And take <i>the helmet of salvation</i> and the sword of the Spirit (which is the word of God). <span class="verse">6:18</span> With every prayer and petition, pray at all times in the Spirit, and to this end be alert, with all perseverance and petitions for all the saints. <span class="verse">6:19</span> Pray for me also, that I may be given the right words when I begin to speak —that I may confidently make known the mystery of the gospel, <span class="verse">6:20</span> for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may be able to speak boldly as I ought to speak. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Farewell Comments</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:21</span> Tychicus, my dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will make everything known to you, so that you too may know about my circumstances, how I am doing. <span class="verse">6:22</span> I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know our circumstances and that he may encourage your hearts. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:23</span> Peace to the brothers and sisters, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">6:24</span> Grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love. </p>

</body>
</html>