<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Jonah 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Jonah<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Jonah prayed to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> his God from the stomach of the fish <span class="verse">2:2</span> and said, </p>
<p class="poetry">“I called out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> from my distress, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he answered me; </p>
<p class="poetry">from the belly of Sheol I cried out for help, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you heard my prayer. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> You threw me into the deep waters, </p>
<p class="poetry">into the middle of the sea; </p>
<p class="poetry">the ocean current engulfed me;</p>
<p class="poetry">all the mighty waves you sent swept over me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> I thought I had been banished from your sight </p>
<p class="poetry">and that I would never again see your holy temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> Water engulfed me up to my neck; </p>
<p class="poetry">the deep ocean surrounded me;</p>
<p class="poetry">seaweed was wrapped around my head. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> I went down to the very bottoms of the mountains; </p>
<p class="poetry">the gates of the netherworld barred me in forever, </p>
<p class="poetry">but you brought me up from the Pit, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, my God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> When my life was ebbing away, I called out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry">And my prayer came to you, to your holy temple. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Those who worship worthless idols forfeit the mercy that could be theirs. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> But as for me, I promise to offer a sacrifice to you with a public declaration of praise; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will surely do what I have promised. </p>
<p class="poetry">Salvation belongs to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:10</span> Then the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded the fish and it vomited Jonah out onto dry land. </p>

</body>
</html>