<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 29</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 29</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Blowing Trumpets</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:1</span> “‘On the first day of the seventh month, you are to hold a holy assembly. You must not do your ordinary work, for it is a day of blowing trumpets for you. <span class="verse">29:2</span> You must offer a burnt offering as a sweet aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>: one young bull, one ram, and seven lambs one year old without blemish. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:3</span> “‘Their grain offering is to be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil, three-tenths of an ephah for the bull, two-tenths of an ephah for the ram, <span class="verse">29:4</span> and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs, <span class="verse">29:5</span> with one male goat for a purification offering to make an atonement for you; <span class="verse">29:6</span> this is in addition to the monthly burnt offering and its grain offering, and the daily burnt offering with its grain offering and their drink offerings as prescribed, as a sweet aroma, a sacrifice made by fire to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Day of Atonement</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:7</span> “‘On the tenth day of this seventh month you are to have a holy assembly. You must humble yourselves; you must not do any work on it. <span class="verse">29:8</span> But you must offer a burnt offering as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, one young bull, one ram, and seven lambs one year old, all of them without blemish. <span class="verse">29:9</span> Their grain offerings must be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil, three-tenths of an ephah for the bull, two-tenths for the ram, <span class="verse">29:10</span> and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs, <span class="verse">29:11</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the purification offering for atonement and the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and their drink offerings. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feast of Temporary Shelters</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:12</span> “‘On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you are to have a holy assembly; you must do no ordinary work, and you must keep a festival to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for seven days. <span class="verse">29:13</span> You must offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>: thirteen young bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs each one year old, all of them without blemish. <span class="verse">29:14</span> Their grain offerings must be of finely ground flour mixed with olive oil, three-tenths of an ephah for each of the thirteen bulls, two-tenths of an ephah for each of the two rams, <span class="verse">29:15</span> and one-tenth for each of the fourteen lambs, <span class="verse">29:16</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:17</span> “‘On the second day you must offer twelve young bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish, <span class="verse">29:18</span> and their grain offerings and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed, <span class="verse">29:19</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and their drink offerings. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:20</span> “‘On the third day you must offer eleven bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish, <span class="verse">29:21</span> and their grain offerings and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed, <span class="verse">29:22</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:23</span> “‘On the fourth day you must offer ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish, <span class="verse">29:24</span> and their grain offerings and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed, <span class="verse">29:25</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:26</span> “‘On the fifth day you must offer nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish, <span class="verse">29:27</span> and their grain offerings and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed, <span class="verse">29:28</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:29</span> “‘On the sixth day you must offer eight bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish, <span class="verse">29:30</span> and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed, <span class="verse">29:31</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:32</span> “‘On the seventh day you must offer seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen lambs one year old, all without blemish, <span class="verse">29:33</span> and their grain offerings and their drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed, <span class="verse">29:34</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:35</span> “‘On the eighth day you are to have a holy assembly; you must do no ordinary work on it. <span class="verse">29:36</span> But you must offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, one bull, one ram, seven lambs one year old, all of them without blemish, <span class="verse">29:37</span> and with their grain offerings and their drink offerings for the bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, according to their number as prescribed, <span class="verse">29:38</span> along with one male goat for a purification offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering with its grain offering and its drink offering. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">29:39</span> “‘These things you must present to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> at your appointed times, in addition to your vows and your freewill offerings, as your burnt offerings, your grain offerings, your drink offerings, and your peace offerings.’” <span class="verse">29:40</span> (30:1) So Moses told the Israelites everything, just as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had commanded him. </p>

</body>
</html>