<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ecclesiastes 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ecclesiastes<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rash Vows</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:1</span> (4:17) Be careful what you do when you go to the temple of God;</p>
<p class="poetry">draw near to listen rather than to offer a sacrifice like fools, </p>
<p class="poetry">for they do not realize that they are doing wrong. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> (5:1) Do not be rash with your mouth or hasty in your heart to bring up a matter before God,</p>
<p class="poetry">for God is in heaven and you are on earth!</p>
<p class="poetry">Therefore, let your words be few. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> Just as dreams come when there are many cares, </p>
<p class="poetry">so the rash vow of a fool occurs when there are many words. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> When you make a vow to God, do not delay in paying it. </p>
<p class="poetry">For God takes no pleasure in fools:</p>
<p class="poetry">Pay what you vow! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> It is better for you not to vow</p>
<p class="poetry">than to vow and not pay it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> Do not let your mouth cause you to sin,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not tell the priest, “It was a mistake!” </p>
<p class="poetry">Why make God angry at you </p>
<p class="poetry">so that he would destroy the work of your hands? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> Just as there is futility in many dreams,</p>
<p class="poetry">so also in many words. </p>
<p class="poetry">Therefore, fear God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Government Corruption</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> If you see the extortion of the poor,</p>
<p class="poetry">or the perversion of justice and fairness in the government, </p>
<p class="poetry">do not be astonished by the matter.</p>
<p class="poetry">For the high official is watched by a higher official, </p>
<p class="poetry">and there are higher ones over them! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> The produce of the land is seized by all of them,</p>
<p class="poetry">even the king is served by the fields. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Covetousness</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> The one who loves money will never be satisfied with money, </p>
<p class="poetry">he who loves wealth will never be satisfied with his income.</p>
<p class="poetry">This also is futile. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> When someone’s prosperity increases, those who consume it also increase;</p>
<p class="poetry">so what does its owner gain, except that he gets to see it with his eyes? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> The sleep of the laborer is pleasant—whether he eats little or much—</p>
<p class="poetry">but the wealth of the rich will not allow him to sleep. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Materialism Thwarts Enjoyment of Life</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> Here is a misfortune on earth that I have seen:</p>
<p class="poetry">Wealth hoarded by its owner to his own misery. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:14</span> Then that wealth was lost through bad luck; </p>
<p class="poetry">although he fathered a son, he has nothing left to give him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> Just as he came forth from his mother’s womb, naked will he return as he came,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he will take nothing in his hand that he may carry away from his toil. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:16</span> This is another misfortune: </p>
<p class="poetry">Just as he came, so will he go.</p>
<p class="poetry">What did he gain from toiling for the wind? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:17</span> Surely, he ate in darkness every day of his life, </p>
<p class="poetry">and he suffered greatly with sickness and anger. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Enjoy the Fruit of Your Labor</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:18</span> I have seen personally what is the only beneficial and appropriate course of action for people: </p>
<p class="poetry">to eat and drink, and find enjoyment in all their hard work on earth </p>
<p class="poetry">during the few days of their life that God has given them,</p>
<p class="poetry">for this is their reward. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:19</span> To every man whom God has given wealth and possessions,</p>
<p class="poetry">he has also given him the ability </p>
<p class="poetry">to eat from them, to receive his reward, and to find enjoyment in his toil;</p>
<p class="poetry">these things are the gift of God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:20</span> For he does not think much about the fleeting days of his life</p>
<p class="poetry">because God keeps him preoccupied with the joy he derives from his activity. </p>

</body>
</html>