<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Numbers 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Numbers<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Budding of Aaron’s Staff</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span>  The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> spoke to Moses: <span class="verse">17:2</span> “Speak to the Israelites, and receive from them a staff from each tribe, one from every tribal leader, twelve staffs; you must write each man’s name on his staff. <span class="verse">17:3</span> You must write Aaron’s name on the staff of Levi; for one staff is for the head of every tribe. <span class="verse">17:4</span> You must place them in the tent of meeting before the ark of the covenant where I meet with you. <span class="verse">17:5</span> And the staff of the man whom I choose will blossom; so I will rid myself of the complaints of the Israelites, which they murmur against you.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:6</span> So Moses spoke to the Israelites, and each of their leaders gave him a staff, one for each leader, according to their tribes —twelve staffs; the staff of Aaron was among their staffs. <span class="verse">17:7</span> Then Moses placed the staffs before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> in the tent of the testimony. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:8</span> On the next day Moses went into the tent of the testimony—and the staff of Aaron for the house of Levi had sprouted, and brought forth buds, and produced blossoms, and yielded almonds! <span class="verse">17:9</span> So Moses brought out all the staffs from before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> to all the Israelites. They looked at them, and each man took his staff. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Memorial</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:10</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to Moses, “Bring Aaron’s staff back before the testimony to be preserved for a sign to the rebels, so that you may bring their murmurings to an end before me, that they will not die.” <span class="verse">17:11</span> So Moses did as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> commanded him—this is what he did. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:12</span> The Israelites said to Moses, “We are bound to die! We perish, we all perish! <span class="verse">17:13</span> (17:28) Anyone who even comes close to the tabernacle of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will die! Are we all to die?” </p>

</body>
</html>