<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Kings 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Kings<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Elijah Runs for His Life</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:1</span> Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, including a detailed account of how he killed all the prophets with the sword. <span class="verse">19:2</span> Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah with this warning, “May the gods judge me severely if by this time tomorrow I do not take your life as you did theirs!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:3</span> Elijah was afraid, so he got up and fled for his life to Beer Sheba in Judah. He left his servant there, <span class="verse">19:4</span> while he went a day’s journey into the wilderness. He went and sat down under a shrub and asked the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> to take his life: “I’ve had enough! Now, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, take my life. After all, I’m no better than my ancestors.” <span class="verse">19:5</span> He stretched out and fell asleep under the shrub. Suddenly an angelic messenger touched him and said, “Get up and eat.” <span class="verse">19:6</span> He looked and right there by his head was a cake baking on hot coals and a jug of water. He ate and drank and then slept some more. <span class="verse">19:7</span> The angel of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> came back again, touched him, and said, “Get up and eat, for otherwise you won’t be able to make the journey.” <span class="verse">19:8</span> So he got up and ate and drank. That meal gave him the strength to travel forty days and forty nights until he reached Horeb, the mountain of God. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:9</span> He went into a cave there and spent the night. Suddenly the <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to him, “Why are you here, Elijah?” <span class="verse">19:10</span> He answered, “I have been absolutely loyal to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies, even though the Israelites have abandoned the covenant they made with you, torn down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am left and now they want to take my life.” <span class="verse">19:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said, “Go out and stand on the mountain before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Look, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is ready to pass by.”</p>
<p class="bodytext">A very powerful wind went before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, digging into the mountain and causing landslides, but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was not in the wind. After the windstorm there was an earthquake, but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was not in the earthquake. <span class="verse">19:12</span> After the earthquake, there was a fire, but the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was not in the fire. After the fire, there was a soft whisper. <span class="verse">19:13</span> When Elijah heard it, he covered his face with his robe and went out and stood at the entrance to the cave. Suddenly a voice asked him, “Why are you here, Elijah?” <span class="verse">19:14</span> He answered, “I have been absolutely loyal to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Heaven’s Armies, even though the Israelites have abandoned the covenant they made with you, torn down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am left and now they want to take my life.” <span class="verse">19:15</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> said to him, “Go back the way you came and then head for the wilderness of Damascus. Go and anoint Hazael king over Syria. <span class="verse">19:16</span> You must anoint Jehu son of Nimshi king over Israel, and Elisha son of Shaphat from Abel Meholah to take your place as prophet. <span class="verse">19:17</span> Jehu will kill anyone who escapes Hazael’s sword, and Elisha will kill anyone who escapes Jehu’s sword. <span class="verse">19:18</span> I still have left in Israel 7,000 followers who have not bowed their knees to Baal or kissed the images of him.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:19</span> Elijah went from there and found Elisha son of Shaphat. He was plowing with twelve pairs of oxen; he was near the twelfth pair. Elijah passed by him and threw his robe over him. <span class="verse">19:20</span> He left the oxen, ran after Elijah, and said, “Please let me kiss my father and mother goodbye, then I will follow you.” Elijah said to him, “Go back! Indeed, what have I done to you?” <span class="verse">19:21</span> Elisha went back and took his pair of oxen and slaughtered them. He cooked the meat over a fire that he made by burning the harness and yoke. He gave the people meat and they ate. Then he got up and followed Elijah and became his assistant. </p>

</body>
</html>