<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Genesis 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Genesis<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Abraham and Abimelech</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:1</span> Abraham journeyed from there to the Negev region and settled between Kadesh and Shur. While he lived as a temporary resident in Gerar, <span class="verse">20:2</span> Abraham said about his wife Sarah, “She is my sister.” So Abimelech, king of Gerar, sent for Sarah and took her.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:3</span> But God appeared to Abimelech in a dream at night and said to him, “You are as good as dead because of the woman you have taken, for she is someone else’s wife.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:4</span> Now Abimelech had not gone near her. He said, “Lord, would you really slaughter an innocent nation? <span class="verse">20:5</span> Did Abraham not say to me, ‘She is my sister’? And she herself said, ‘He is my brother.’ I have done this with a clear conscience and with innocent hands!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:6</span> Then in the dream God replied to him, “Yes, I know that you have done this with a clear conscience. That is why I have kept you from sinning against me and why I did not allow you to touch her. <span class="verse">20:7</span> But now give back the man’s wife. Indeed he is a prophet and he will pray for you; thus you will live. But if you don’t give her back, know that you will surely die along with all who belong to you.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:8</span> Early in the morning Abimelech summoned all his servants. When he told them about all these things, they were terrified. <span class="verse">20:9</span> Abimelech summoned Abraham and said to him, “What have you done to us? What sin did I commit against you that would cause you to bring such great guilt on me and my kingdom? You have done things to me that should not be done!” <span class="verse">20:10</span> Then Abimelech asked Abraham, “What prompted you to do this thing?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:11</span> Abraham replied, “Because I thought, ‘Surely no one fears God in this place. They will kill me because of my wife.’ <span class="verse">20:12</span> What’s more, she is indeed my sister, my father’s daughter, but not my mother’s daughter. She became my wife. <span class="verse">20:13</span> When God made me wander from my father’s house, I told her, ‘This is what you can do to show your loyalty to me: Every place we go, say about me, “He is my brother.”’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:14</span> So Abimelech gave sheep, cattle, and male and female servants to Abraham. He also gave his wife Sarah back to him. <span class="verse">20:15</span> Then Abimelech said, “Look, my land is before you; live wherever you please.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:16</span> To Sarah he said, “Look, I have given 1,000 pieces of silver to your ‘brother.’ This is compensation for you so that you will stand vindicated before all who are with you.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:17</span> Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech, as well as his wife and female slaves so that they were able to have children. <span class="verse">20:18</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> had caused infertility to strike every woman in the household of Abimelech because he took Sarah, Abraham’s wife. </p>

</body>
</html>