<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 52</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 52</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a well-written song by David. It was written when Doeg the Edomite went and informed Saul: “David has arrived at the home of Ahimelech.” </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:1</span> Why do you boast about your evil plans, O powerful man?</p>
<p class="poetry">God’s loyal love protects me all day long. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:2</span> Your tongue carries out your destructive plans; </p>
<p class="poetry">it is as effective as a sharp razor, O deceiver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:3</span> You love evil more than good,</p>
<p class="poetry">lies more than speaking the truth. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:4</span> You love to use all the words that destroy, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the tongue that deceives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:5</span> Yet God will make you a permanent heap of ruins. </p>
<p class="poetry">He will scoop you up and remove you from your home; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will uproot you from the land of the living. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:6</span> When the godly see this, they will be filled with awe,</p>
<p class="poetry">and will mock the evildoer, saying: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:7</span> “Look, here is the man who would not make God his protector.</p>
<p class="poetry">He trusted in his great wealth</p>
<p class="poetry">and was confident about his plans to destroy others.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:8</span> But I am like a flourishing olive tree in the house of God;</p>
<p class="poetry">I continually trust in God’s loyal love. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">52:9</span> I will continually thank you when you execute judgment; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will rely on you, for your loyal followers know you are good. </p>

</body>
</html>