<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Chronicles 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Chronicles<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Abijah’s Reign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> In the eighteenth year of the reign of King Jeroboam, Abijah became king over Judah. <span class="verse">13:2</span> He ruled for three years in Jerusalem. His mother was Michaiah, the daughter of Uriel from Gibeah. </p>
<p class="bodytext">There was war between Abijah and Jeroboam. <span class="verse">13:3</span> Abijah launched the attack with 400,000 well-trained warriors, while Jeroboam deployed against him 800,000 well-trained warriors. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:4</span> Abijah ascended Mount Zemaraim, in the Ephraimite hill country, and said: “Listen to me, Jeroboam and all Israel! <span class="verse">13:5</span> Don’t you realize that the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of Israel has given David and his dynasty lasting dominion over Israel by a formal covenant? <span class="verse">13:6</span> Jeroboam son of Nebat, a servant of Solomon son of David, rose up and rebelled against his master. <span class="verse">13:7</span> Lawless good-for-nothing men gathered around him and conspired against Rehoboam son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was an inexperienced young man and could not resist them. <span class="verse">13:8</span> Now you are declaring that you will resist the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s rule through the Davidic dynasty. You have a huge army, and bring with you the gold calves that Jeroboam made for you as gods. <span class="verse">13:9</span> But you banished the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s priests, Aaron’s descendants, and the Levites, and appointed your own priests just as the surrounding nations do! Anyone who comes to consecrate himself with a young bull or seven rams becomes a priest of these fake gods! <span class="verse">13:10</span> But as for us, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is our God and we have not rejected him. Aaron’s descendants serve as the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s priests, and the Levites assist them with the work. <span class="verse">13:11</span> They offer burnt sacrifices to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> every morning and every evening, along with fragrant incense. They arrange the Bread of the Presence on a ritually clean table and light the lamps on the gold lampstand every evening. Certainly we are observing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God’s regulations, but you have rejected him. <span class="verse">13:12</span> Now look, God is with us as our leader. His priests are ready to blow the trumpets to signal the attack against you. You Israelites, don’t fight against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of your ancestors, for you will not win!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:13</span> Now Jeroboam had sent some men to ambush the Judahite army from behind. The main army was in front of the Judahite army; the ambushers were behind it. <span class="verse">13:14</span> The men of Judah turned around and realized they were being attacked from the front and the rear. So they cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for help. The priests blew their trumpets, <span class="verse">13:15</span> and the men of Judah gave the battle cry. As the men of Judah gave the battle cry, God struck down Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah. <span class="verse">13:16</span> The Israelites fled from before the Judahite army, and God handed them over to the men of Judah. <span class="verse">13:17</span> Abijah and his army thoroughly defeated them; 500,000 well-trained Israelite men fell dead. <span class="verse">13:18</span> That day the Israelites were defeated; the men of Judah prevailed because they relied on the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of their ancestors. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:19</span> Abijah chased Jeroboam; he seized from him these cities: Bethel and its surrounding towns, Jeshanah and its surrounding towns, and Ephron and its surrounding towns. <span class="verse">13:20</span> Jeroboam did not regain power during the reign of Abijah. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> struck him down and he died. <span class="verse">13:21</span> Abijah’s power grew; he had fourteen wives and fathered twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:22</span> The rest of the events of Abijah’s reign, including his deeds and sayings, are recorded in the writings of the prophet Iddo. </p>

</body>
</html>