<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Ephraim</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:1</span> The splendid crown of Ephraim’s drunkards is doomed, </p>
<p class="poetry">the withering flower, its beautiful splendor, </p>
<p class="poetry">situated at the head of a rich valley,</p>
<p class="poetry">the crown of those overcome with wine. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:2</span> Look, the Lord sends a strong, powerful one. </p>
<p class="poetry">With the force of a hailstorm or a destructive windstorm, </p>
<p class="poetry">with the might of a driving, torrential rainstorm, </p>
<p class="poetry">he will knock that crown to the ground with his hand. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:3</span> The splendid crown of Ephraim’s drunkards</p>
<p class="poetry">will be trampled underfoot. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:4</span> The withering flower, its beautiful splendor,</p>
<p class="poetry">situated at the head of a rich valley, </p>
<p class="poetry">will be like an early fig before harvest—</p>
<p class="poetry">as soon as someone notices it,</p>
<p class="poetry">he grabs it and swallows it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:5</span> At that time the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies will become a beautiful crown </p>
<p class="poetry">and a splendid diadem for the remnant of his people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:6</span> He will give discernment to the one who makes judicial decisions,</p>
<p class="poetry">and strength to those who defend the city from attackers. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:7</span> Even these men stagger because of wine;</p>
<p class="poetry">they stumble around because of beer—</p>
<p class="poetry">priests and prophets stagger because of beer,</p>
<p class="poetry">they are confused because of wine,</p>
<p class="poetry">they stumble around because of beer;</p>
<p class="poetry">they stagger while seeing prophetic visions, </p>
<p class="poetry">they totter while making legal decisions. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:8</span> Indeed, all the tables</p>
<p class="poetry">are covered with vomit,</p>
<p class="poetry">with filth, leaving no clean place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:9</span> Who is the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> trying to teach?</p>
<p class="poetry">To whom is he explaining a message? </p>
<p class="poetry">To those just weaned from milk!</p>
<p class="poetry">To those just taken from their mother’s breast! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:10</span> Indeed, they will hear meaningless gibberish,</p>
<p class="poetry">senseless babbling,</p>
<p class="poetry">a syllable here, a syllable there. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:11</span> For with mocking lips and a foreign tongue</p>
<p class="poetry">he will speak to these people. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:12</span> In the past he said to them, </p>
<p class="poetry">“This is where security can be found.</p>
<p class="poetry">Provide security for the one who is exhausted.</p>
<p class="poetry">This is where rest can be found.” </p>
<p class="poetry">But they refused to listen. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:13</span> So the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message to them will sound like</p>
<p class="poetry">meaningless gibberish,</p>
<p class="poetry">senseless babbling,</p>
<p class="poetry">a syllable here, a syllable there. </p>
<p class="poetry">As a result, they will fall on their backsides when they try to walk, </p>
<p class="poetry">and be injured, ensnared, and captured. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Will Judge Jerusalem</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:14</span> Therefore, listen to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s message,</p>
<p class="poetry">you who mock,</p>
<p class="poetry">you rulers of these people</p>
<p class="poetry">who reside in Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:15</span> For you say,</p>
<p class="poetry">“We have made a treaty with death,</p>
<p class="poetry">with Sheol we have made an agreement. </p>
<p class="poetry">When the overwhelming judgment sweeps by </p>
<p class="poetry">it will not reach us.</p>
<p class="poetry">For we have made a lie our refuge,</p>
<p class="poetry">we have hidden ourselves in a deceitful word.” </p>
<p class="poetrybreak"><span class="verse">28:16</span> Therefore, this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, says:</p>
<p class="poetry">“Look, I am laying a stone in Zion,</p>
<p class="poetry">an approved stone,</p>
<p class="poetry">set in place as a precious cornerstone for the foundation. </p>
<p class="poetry">The one who maintains his faith will not panic. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:17</span> I will make justice the measuring line,</p>
<p class="poetry">fairness the plumb line;</p>
<p class="poetry">hail will sweep away the unreliable refuge, </p>
<p class="poetry">the floodwaters will overwhelm the hiding place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:18</span> Your treaty with death will be dissolved; </p>
<p class="poetry">your agreement with Sheol will not last. </p>
<p class="poetry">When the overwhelming judgment sweeps by, </p>
<p class="poetry">you will be overrun by it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:19</span> Whenever it sweeps by, it will overtake you;</p>
<p class="poetry">indeed, every morning it will sweep by,</p>
<p class="poetry">it will come through during the day and the night.” </p>
<p class="poetry">When this announcement is understood,</p>
<p class="poetry">it will cause nothing but terror. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:20</span> For the bed is too short to stretch out on,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the blanket is too narrow to wrap around oneself. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:21</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will rise up, as he did at Mount Perazim; </p>
<p class="poetry">he will rouse himself, as he did in the Valley of Gibeon, </p>
<p class="poetry">to accomplish his work,</p>
<p class="poetry">his peculiar work,</p>
<p class="poetry">to perform his task,</p>
<p class="poetry">his strange task. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:22</span> So now, do not mock,</p>
<p class="poetry">or your chains will become heavier!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I have heard a message about decreed destruction,</p>
<p class="poetry">from the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies against the entire land. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:23</span> Pay attention and listen to my message. </p>
<p class="poetry">Be attentive and listen to what I have to say! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:24</span> Does a farmer just keep on plowing at planting time? </p>
<p class="poetry">Does he keep breaking up and harrowing his ground? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:25</span> Once he has leveled its surface, </p>
<p class="poetry">does he not scatter the seed of the caraway plant,</p>
<p class="poetry">sow the seed of the cumin plant,</p>
<p class="poetry">and plant the wheat, barley, and grain in their designated places? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:26</span> His God instructs him;</p>
<p class="poetry">he teaches him the principles of agriculture. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:27</span> Certainly caraway seed is not threshed with a sledge,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor is the wheel of a cart rolled over cumin seed. </p>
<p class="poetry">Certainly caraway seed is beaten with a stick,</p>
<p class="poetry">and cumin seed with a flail. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:28</span> Grain is crushed,</p>
<p class="poetry">though one certainly does not thresh it forever.</p>
<p class="poetry">The wheel of one’s wagon rolls over it,</p>
<p class="poetry">but his horses do not crush it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:29</span> This also comes from the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies,</p>
<p class="poetry">who gives supernatural guidance and imparts great wisdom. </p>

</body>
</html>