<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Isaiah 36</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Isaiah<br />Chapter 36</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Sennacherib Invades Judah</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">36:1</span> In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah’s reign, King Sennacherib of Assyria marched up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. <span class="verse">36:2</span> The king of Assyria sent his chief adviser from Lachish to King Hezekiah in Jerusalem, along with a large army. The chief adviser stood at the conduit of the upper pool that is located on the road to the field where they wash and dry cloth. <span class="verse">36:3</span> Eliakim son of Hilkiah, the palace supervisor, accompanied by Shebna the scribe and Joah son of Asaph, the secretary, went out to meet him. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">36:4</span> The chief adviser said to them, “Tell Hezekiah: ‘This is what the great king, the king of Assyria, says: “What is your source of confidence? <span class="verse">36:5</span> Your claim to have a strategy and military strength is just empty talk. In whom are you trusting, that you would dare to rebel against me? <span class="verse">36:6</span> Look, you must be trusting in Egypt, that splintered reed staff. If someone leans on it for support, it punctures his hand and wounds him. That is what Pharaoh king of Egypt does to all who trust in him! <span class="verse">36:7</span> Perhaps you will tell me, ‘We are trusting in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God.’ But Hezekiah is the one who eliminated his high places and altars and then told the people of Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You must worship at this altar.’ <span class="verse">36:8</span> Now make a deal with my master the king of Assyria, and I will give you 2,000 horses, provided you can find enough riders for them. <span class="verse">36:9</span> Certainly you will not refuse one of my master’s minor officials and trust in Egypt for chariots and horsemen. <span class="verse">36:10</span> Furthermore it was by the command of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> that I marched up against this land to destroy it. The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> told me, ‘March up against this land and destroy it!’”’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">36:11</span> Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah said to the chief adviser, “Speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it. Don’t speak with us in the Judahite dialect in the hearing of the people who are on the wall.” <span class="verse">36:12</span> But the chief adviser said, “My master did not send me to speak these words only to your master and to you. His message is also for the men who sit on the wall, for they will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">36:13</span> The chief adviser then stood there and called out loudly in the Judahite dialect, “Listen to the message of the great king, the king of Assyria. <span class="verse">36:14</span> This is what the king says: ‘Don’t let Hezekiah mislead you, for he is not able to rescue you! <span class="verse">36:15</span> Don’t let Hezekiah talk you into trusting in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> by saying, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will certainly rescue us; this city will not be handed over to the king of Assyria.” <span class="verse">36:16</span> Don’t listen to Hezekiah!’ For this is what the king of Assyria says, ‘Send me a token of your submission and surrender to me. Then each of you may eat from his own vine and fig tree and drink water from his own cistern, <span class="verse">36:17</span> until I come and take you to a land just like your own—a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards. <span class="verse">36:18</span> Hezekiah is misleading you when he says, “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will rescue us.” Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their lands from the power of the king of Assyria? <span class="verse">36:19</span> Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Indeed, did any gods rescue Samaria from my power? <span class="verse">36:20</span> Who among all the gods of these lands have rescued their lands from my power? So how can the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> rescue Jerusalem from my power?’” <span class="verse">36:21</span> They were silent and did not respond, for the king had ordered, “Don’t respond to him.”</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">36:22</span> Eliakim son of Hilkiah, the palace supervisor, accompanied by Shebna the scribe and Joah son of Asaph, the secretary, went to Hezekiah with their clothes torn and reported to him what the chief adviser had said.</p>

</body>
</html>