<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Mark 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Destruction of the Temple </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> Now as Jesus was going out of the temple courts, one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, look at these tremendous stones and buildings!” <span class="verse">13:2</span> Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? Not one stone will be left on another. All will be torn down!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Signs of the End of the Age </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:3</span> So while he was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, <span class="verse">13:4</span> “Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that all these things are about to take place?” <span class="verse">13:5</span> Jesus began to say to them, “Watch out that no one misleads you. <span class="verse">13:6</span> Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and they will mislead many. <span class="verse">13:7</span> When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. These things must happen, but the end is still to come. <span class="verse">13:8</span> For nation will rise up in arms against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places, and there will be famines. These are but the beginning of birth pains. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Persecution of Disciples</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:9</span> “You must watch out for yourselves. You will be handed over to councils and beaten in the synagogues. You will stand before governors and kings because of me, as a witness to them. <span class="verse">13:10</span> First the gospel must be preached to all nations. <span class="verse">13:11</span> When they arrest you and hand you over for trial, do not worry about what to speak. But say whatever is given you at that time, for it is not you speaking, but the Holy Spirit. <span class="verse">13:12</span> Brother will hand over brother to death, and a father his child. Children will rise against parents and have them put to death. <span class="verse">13:13</span> You will be hated by everyone because of my name. But the one who endures to the end will be saved. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Abomination of Desolation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:14</span> “But when you see <i>the abomination of desolation</i> standing where it should not be” (let the reader understand), “then those in Judea must flee to the mountains. <span class="verse">13:15</span> The one on the roof must not come down or go inside to take anything out of his house. <span class="verse">13:16</span> The one in the field must not turn back to get his cloak. <span class="verse">13:17</span> Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing their babies in those days! <span class="verse">13:18</span> Pray that it may not be in winter. <span class="verse">13:19</span> For in those days there will be suffering unlike anything that has happened from the beginning of the creation that God created until now, or ever will happen. <span class="verse">13:20</span> And if the Lord had not cut short those days, no one would be saved. But because of the elect, whom he chose, he has cut them short. <span class="verse">13:21</span> Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘Look, there he is!’ do not believe him. <span class="verse">13:22</span> For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, the elect. <span class="verse">13:23</span> Be careful! I have told you everything ahead of time. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Arrival of the Son of Man </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:24</span> “But in those days, after that suffering, <i>the sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light;</i> <span class="verse">13:25</span> <i>the stars will be falling from heaven</i>, <i>and</i> <i>the powers in the heavens will be shaken</i>. <span class="verse">13:26</span> Then everyone will see <i>the Son of Man arriving in the clouds</i> with great power and glory. <span class="verse">13:27</span> Then he will send angels and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Fig Tree </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:28</span> “Learn this parable from the fig tree: Whenever its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near. <span class="verse">13:29</span> So also you, when you see these things happening, know that he is near, right at the door. <span class="verse">13:30</span> I tell you the truth, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place. <span class="verse">13:31</span> Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Be Ready!</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:32</span> “But as for that day or hour no one knows it—neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son —except the Father. <span class="verse">13:33</span> Watch out! Stay alert! For you do not know when the time will come. <span class="verse">13:34</span> It is like a man going on a journey. He left his house and put his slaves in charge, assigning to each his work, and commanded the doorkeeper to stay alert. <span class="verse">13:35</span> Stay alert, then, because you do not know when the owner of the house will return—whether during evening, at midnight, when the rooster crows, or at dawn— <span class="verse">13:36</span> or else he might find you asleep when he returns suddenly. <span class="verse">13:37</span> What I say to you I say to everyone: Stay alert!” </p>

</body>
</html>