<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 35</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 35</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prophecy Against Mount Seir</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">35:2</span> “Son of man, turn toward Mount Seir, and prophesy against it. <span class="verse">35:3</span> Say to it, ‘This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: </p>
<p class="poetry">“‘Look, I am against you, Mount Seir;</p>
<p class="poetry">I will stretch out my hand against you</p>
<p class="poetry">and turn you into a desolate ruin. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">35:4</span> I will lay waste your cities,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you will become desolate.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:5</span> “‘You have shown unrelenting hostility and poured the people of Israel onto the blades of a sword at the time of their calamity, at the time of their final punishment. <span class="verse">35:6</span> Therefore, as surely as I live, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I will subject you to bloodshed, and bloodshed will pursue you. Since you did not hate bloodshed, bloodshed will pursue you. <span class="verse">35:7</span> I will turn Mount Seir into a desolate ruin; I will cut off from it the one who passes through or returns. <span class="verse">35:8</span> I will fill its mountains with its dead; on your hills and in your valleys and in all your ravines, those killed by the sword will fall. <span class="verse">35:9</span> I will turn you into a perpetual desolation, and your cities will not be inhabited. Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">35:10</span> “‘You said, “These two nations, these two lands will be mine, and we will possess them,” (although the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was there); <span class="verse">35:11</span> therefore, as surely as I live, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, I will deal with you according to your anger and your envy, by which you acted spitefully against them. I will reveal myself to them when I judge you. <span class="verse">35:12</span> Then you will know that I, the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, have heard all the insults you spoke against the mountains of Israel, saying, “They are desolate; they have been given to us for food.” <span class="verse">35:13</span> You exalted yourselves against me with your speech and hurled many insults against me —I have heard them all! <span class="verse">35:14</span> This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: While the whole earth rejoices, I will turn you into a desolation. <span class="verse">35:15</span> As you rejoiced over the inheritance of the house of Israel because it was desolate, so will I deal with you—you will be desolate, Mount Seir, and all Edom—all of it! Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’” </p>

</body>
</html>