<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 56</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 56</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, according to the <i>yonath-elem-rekhoqim</i> style; a prayer of David, written when the Philistines captured him in Gath. </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:1</span> Have mercy on me, O God, for men are attacking me. </p>
<p class="poetry">All day long hostile enemies are tormenting me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:2</span> Those who anticipate my defeat attack me all day long.</p>
<p class="poetry">Indeed, many are fighting against me, O Exalted One. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:3</span> When I am afraid,</p>
<p class="poetry">I trust in you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:4</span> In God—I boast in his promise —</p>
<p class="poetry">in God I trust; I am not afraid.</p>
<p class="poetry">What can mere men do to me? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:5</span> All day long they cause me trouble; </p>
<p class="poetry">they make a habit of plotting my demise. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:6</span> They stalk and lurk; </p>
<p class="poetry">they watch my every step, </p>
<p class="poetry">as they prepare to take my life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:7</span> Because they are bent on violence, do not let them escape. </p>
<p class="poetry">In your anger bring down the nations, O God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:8</span> You keep track of my misery. </p>
<p class="poetry">Put my tears in your leather container. </p>
<p class="poetry">Are they not recorded in your scroll? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:9</span> My enemies will turn back when I cry out to you for help; </p>
<p class="poetry">I know that God is on my side. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:10</span> In God—I boast in his promise —</p>
<p class="poetry">in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—I boast in his promise —</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:11</span> in God I trust; I am not afraid.</p>
<p class="poetry">What can mere men do to me? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:12</span> I am obligated to fulfill the vows I made to you, O God; </p>
<p class="poetry">I will give you the thank offerings you deserve, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">56:13</span> when you deliver my life from death.</p>
<p class="poetry">You keep my feet from stumbling, </p>
<p class="poetry">so that I might serve God as I enjoy life. </p>

</body>
</html>