<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Ezekiel 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ezekiel<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prophecy Against Ammon </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord’</span>s message came to me: <span class="verse">25:2</span> “Son of man, turn toward the Ammonites and prophesy against them. <span class="verse">25:3</span> Say to the Ammonites, ‘Hear the word of the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: You said “Aha!” about my sanctuary when it was desecrated, about the land of Israel when it was made desolate, and about the house of Judah when they went into exile. <span class="verse">25:4</span> So take note, I am about to make you slaves of the tribes of the east. They will make camps among you and pitch their tents among you. They will eat your fruit and drink your milk. <span class="verse">25:5</span> I will make Rabbah a pasture for camels and Ammon a resting place for sheep. Then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">25:6</span> For this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Because you clapped your hands, stamped your feet, and rejoiced with intense scorn over the land of Israel, <span class="verse">25:7</span> take note—I have stretched out my hand against you, and I will hand you over as plunder to the nations. I will cut you off from the peoples and make you perish from the lands. I will destroy you; then you will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prophecy Against Moab</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:8</span> “This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: ‘Moab and Seir say, “Look, the house of Judah is like all the other nations.” <span class="verse">25:9</span> So look, I am about to open up Moab’s flank, eliminating the cities, including its frontier cities, the beauty of the land—Beth Jeshimoth, Baal Meon, and Kiriathaim. <span class="verse">25:10</span> I will hand it over, along with the Ammonites, to the tribes of the east, so that the Ammonites will no longer be remembered among the nations. <span class="verse">25:11</span> I will execute judgments against Moab. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prophecy Against Edom</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:12</span> “This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: ‘Edom has taken vengeance against the house of Judah; they have made themselves fully culpable by taking vengeance on them. <span class="verse">25:13</span> So this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: I will stretch out my hand against Edom, and I will kill the people and animals within her, and I will make her desolate; from Teman to Dedan they will die by the sword. <span class="verse">25:14</span> I will exact my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel. They will carry out in Edom my anger and rage; they will experience my vengeance, declares the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.’”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Prophecy Against Philistia</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:15</span> “This is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: ‘The Philistines have exacted merciless revenge, showing intense scorn in their effort to destroy Judah with unrelenting hostility. <span class="verse">25:16</span> So this is what the Sovereign <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> says: Take note, I am about to stretch out my hand against the Philistines. I will kill the Kerethites and destroy those who remain on the seacoast. <span class="verse">25:17</span> I will exact great vengeance upon them with angry rebukes. Then they will know that I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, when I exact my vengeance upon them.’”</p>

</body>
</html>