<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 139</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 139</h2><p class="psasuper">For the music director, a psalm of David.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you examine me and know me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:2</span> You know when I sit down and when I get up;</p>
<p class="poetry">even from far away you understand my motives. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:3</span> You carefully observe me when I travel or when I lie down to rest; </p>
<p class="poetry">you are aware of everything I do. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:4</span> Certainly my tongue does not frame a word</p>
<p class="poetry">without you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, being thoroughly aware of it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:5</span> You squeeze me in from behind and in front;</p>
<p class="poetry">you place your hand on me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:6</span> Your knowledge is beyond my comprehension;</p>
<p class="poetry">it is so far beyond me, I am unable to fathom it. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:7</span> Where can I go to escape your Spirit?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where can I flee to escape your presence? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:8</span> If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there.</p>
<p class="poetry">If I were to sprawl out in Sheol, there you would be. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:9</span> If I were to fly away on the wings of the dawn, </p>
<p class="poetry">and settle down on the other side of the sea, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:10</span> even there your hand would guide me,</p>
<p class="poetry">your right hand would grab hold of me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:11</span> If I were to say, “Certainly the darkness will cover me, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the light will turn to night all around me,” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:12</span> even the darkness is not too dark for you to see, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the night is as bright as day;</p>
<p class="poetry">darkness and light are the same to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:13</span> Certainly you made my mind and heart; </p>
<p class="poetry">you wove me together in my mother’s womb. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:14</span> I will give you thanks because your deeds are awesome and amazing. </p>
<p class="poetry">You knew me thoroughly; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:15</span> my bones were not hidden from you,</p>
<p class="poetry">when I was made in secret</p>
<p class="poetry">and sewed together in the depths of the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:16</span> Your eyes saw me when I was inside the womb. </p>
<p class="poetry">All the days ordained for me</p>
<p class="poetry">were recorded in your scroll</p>
<p class="poetry">before one of them came into existence. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:17</span> How difficult it is for me to fathom your thoughts about me, O God! </p>
<p class="poetry">How vast is their sum total. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:18</span> If I tried to count them,</p>
<p class="poetry">they would outnumber the grains of sand.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even if I finished counting them,</p>
<p class="poetry">I would still have to contend with you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:19</span> If only you would kill the wicked, O God!</p>
<p class="poetry">Get away from me, you violent men! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:20</span> They rebel against you and act deceitfully; </p>
<p class="poetry">your enemies lie. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:21</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, do I not hate those who hate you,</p>
<p class="poetry">and despise those who oppose you? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:22</span> I absolutely hate them; </p>
<p class="poetry">they have become my enemies. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:23</span> Examine me, O God, and probe my thoughts. </p>
<p class="poetry">Test me, and know my concerns. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">139:24</span> See if there is any idolatrous way in me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and lead me in the everlasting way. </p>

</body>
</html>