<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 2 Timothy 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Timothy<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ministry in the Last Days</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> But understand this, that in the last days difficult times will come. <span class="verse">3:2</span> For people will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy, <span class="verse">3:3</span> unloving, irreconcilable, slanderers, without self-control, savage, opposed to what is good, <span class="verse">3:4</span> treacherous, reckless, conceited, loving pleasure rather than loving God. <span class="verse">3:5</span> They will maintain the outward appearance of religion but will have repudiated its power. So avoid people like these. <span class="verse">3:6</span> For some of these insinuate themselves into households and captivate weak women who are overwhelmed with sins and led along by various passions. <span class="verse">3:7</span> Such women are always seeking instruction, yet never able to arrive at a knowledge of the truth. <span class="verse">3:8</span> And just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these people—who have warped minds and are disqualified in the faith —also oppose the truth. <span class="verse">3:9</span> But they will not go much further, for their foolishness will be obvious to everyone, just like it was with Jannes and Jambres. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Continue in What You Have Learned</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:10</span> You, however, have followed my teaching, my way of life, my purpose, my faith, my patience, my love, my endurance, <span class="verse">3:11</span> as well as the persecutions and sufferings that happened to me in Antioch, in Iconium, and in Lystra. I endured these persecutions and the Lord delivered me from them all. <span class="verse">3:12</span> Now in fact all who want to live godly lives in Christ Jesus will be persecuted. <span class="verse">3:13</span> But evil people and charlatans will go from bad to worse, deceiving others and being deceived themselves. <span class="verse">3:14</span> You, however, must continue in the things you have learned and are confident about. You know who taught you <span class="verse">3:15</span> and how from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to give you wisdom for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">3:16</span> Every scripture is inspired by God and useful for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, <span class="verse">3:17</span> that the person dedicated to God may be capable and equipped for every good work. </p>

</body>
</html>