<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Galatians 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Galatians<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Support One Another</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Brothers and sisters, if a person is discovered in some sin, you who are spiritual restore such a person in a spirit of gentleness. Pay close attention to yourselves, so that you are not tempted too. <span class="verse">6:2</span> Carry one another’s burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ. <span class="verse">6:3</span> For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself. <span class="verse">6:4</span> Let each one examine his own work. Then he can take pride in himself and not compare himself with someone else. <span class="verse">6:5</span> For each one will carry his own load. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:6</span> Now the one who receives instruction in the word must share all good things with the one who teaches it. <span class="verse">6:7</span> Do not be deceived. God will not be made a fool. For a person will reap what he sows, <span class="verse">6:8</span> because the person who sows to his own flesh will reap corruption from the flesh, but the one who sows to the Spirit will reap eternal life from the Spirit. <span class="verse">6:9</span> So we must not grow weary in doing good, for in due time we will reap, if we do not give up. <span class="verse">6:10</span> So then, whenever we have an opportunity, let us do good to all people, and especially to those who belong to the family of faith. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Instructions and Benediction </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:11</span> See what big letters I make as I write to you with my own hand! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:12</span> Those who want to make a good showing in external matters are trying to force you to be circumcised. They do so only to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Christ. <span class="verse">6:13</span> For those who are circumcised do not obey the law themselves, but they want you to be circumcised so that they can boast about your flesh. <span class="verse">6:14</span> But may I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world. <span class="verse">6:15</span> For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything; the only thing that matters is a new creation! <span class="verse">6:16</span> And all who will behave in accordance with this rule, peace and mercy be on them, and on the Israel of God. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:17</span> From now on let no one cause me trouble, for I bear the marks of Jesus on my body. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers and sisters. Amen. </p>

</body>
</html>