<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Job 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Job<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle"><b>III. Job’s Search for Wisdom (28:1—28)</b></p><p class="paragraphtitle">No Known Road to Wisdom </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:1</span> “Surely there is a mine for silver,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a place where gold is refined. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:2</span> Iron is taken from the ground, </p>
<p class="poetry">and rock is poured out as copper. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:3</span> Man puts an end to the darkness; </p>
<p class="poetry">he searches the farthest recesses</p>
<p class="poetry">for the ore in the deepest darkness. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:4</span> Far from where people live he sinks a shaft,</p>
<p class="poetry">in places travelers have long forgotten, </p>
<p class="poetry">far from other people he dangles and sways. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:5</span> The earth, from which food comes,</p>
<p class="poetry">is overturned below as though by fire; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:6</span> a place whose stones are sapphires </p>
<p class="poetry">that contain dust of gold; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:7</span> a hidden path no bird of prey knows—</p>
<p class="poetry">no falcon’s eye has spotted it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:8</span> Proud beasts have not set foot on it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and no lion has passed along it.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:9</span> On the flinty rock man has set to work with his hand;</p>
<p class="poetry">he has overturned mountains at their bases. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:10</span> He has cut out channels through the rocks;</p>
<p class="poetry">his eyes have spotted every precious thing.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:11</span> He has searched the sources of the rivers</p>
<p class="poetry">and what was hidden he has brought into the light. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">No Price Can Buy Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:12</span> “But wisdom—where can it be found?</p>
<p class="poetry">Where is the place of understanding? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:13</span> Mankind does not know its place; </p>
<p class="poetry">it cannot be found in the land of the living. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:14</span> The deep says, ‘It is not with me.’</p>
<p class="poetry">And the sea says, ‘It is not with me.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:15</span> Fine gold cannot be given in exchange for it,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor can its price be weighed out in silver. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:16</span> It cannot be measured out for purchase with the gold of Ophir,</p>
<p class="poetry">with precious onyx or sapphires. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:17</span> Neither gold nor crystal can be compared with it,</p>
<p class="poetry">nor can a vase of gold match its worth.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:18</span> Of coral and jasper no mention will be made;</p>
<p class="poetry">the price of wisdom is more than pearls. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:19</span> The topaz of Cush cannot be compared with it;</p>
<p class="poetry">it cannot be purchased with pure gold. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Alone Has Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:20</span> “But wisdom—where does it come from? </p>
<p class="poetry">Where is the place of understanding? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:21</span> For it has been hidden </p>
<p class="poetry">from the eyes of every living creature,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from the birds of the sky it has been concealed. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:22</span> Destruction and Death say,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘With our ears we have heard a rumor about where it can be found.’ </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:23</span> God understands the way to it,</p>
<p class="poetry">and he alone knows its place. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:24</span> For he looks to the ends of the earth</p>
<p class="poetry">and observes everything under the heavens. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:25</span> When he made the force of the wind</p>
<p class="poetry">and measured the waters with a gauge, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:26</span> when he imposed a limit for the rain,</p>
<p class="poetry">and a path for the thunderstorm, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:27</span> then he looked at wisdom and assessed its value; </p>
<p class="poetry">he established it and examined it closely. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">28:28</span> And he said to mankind,</p>
<p class="poetry">‘The fear of the Lord —that is wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">and to turn away from evil is understanding.’” </p>

</body>
</html>