<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Psalms 88</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Psalm 88</h2><p class="psasuper">A song, a psalm written by the Korahites, for the music director, according to the <i>machalath-leannoth</i> style; a well-written song by Heman the Ezrahite.</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:1</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God who delivers me, </p>
<p class="poetry">by day I cry out</p>
<p class="poetry">and at night I pray before you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:2</span> Listen to my prayer. </p>
<p class="poetry">Pay attention to my cry for help.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:3</span> For my life is filled with troubles,</p>
<p class="poetry">and I am ready to enter Sheol. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:4</span> They treat me like those who descend into the grave. </p>
<p class="poetry">I am like a helpless man, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:5</span> adrift among the dead,</p>
<p class="poetry">like corpses lying in the grave,</p>
<p class="poetry">whom you remember no more,</p>
<p class="poetry">and who are cut off from your power. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:6</span> You place me in the lowest regions of the Pit, </p>
<p class="poetry">in the dark places, in the watery depths. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:7</span> Your anger bears down on me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and you overwhelm me with all your waves. (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:8</span> You cause those who know me to keep their distance;</p>
<p class="poetry">you make me an appalling sight to them.</p>
<p class="poetry">I am trapped and cannot get free. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:9</span> My eyes grow weak because of oppression.</p>
<p class="poetry">I call out to you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, all day long;</p>
<p class="poetry">I spread out my hands in prayer to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:10</span> Do you accomplish amazing things for the dead?</p>
<p class="poetry">Do the departed spirits rise up and give you thanks? (Selah)</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:11</span> Is your loyal love proclaimed in the grave,</p>
<p class="poetry">or your faithfulness in the place of the dead? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:12</span> Are your amazing deeds experienced in the dark region, </p>
<p class="poetry">or your deliverance in the land of oblivion? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:13</span> As for me, I cry out to you, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">in the morning my prayer confronts you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:14</span> O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, why do you reject me,</p>
<p class="poetry">and pay no attention to me? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:15</span> I am oppressed and have been on the verge of death since my youth. </p>
<p class="poetry">I have been subjected to your horrors and am numb with pain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:16</span> Your anger overwhelms me; </p>
<p class="poetry">your terrors destroy me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:17</span> They surround me like water all day long;</p>
<p class="poetry">they join forces and encircle me. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">88:18</span> You cause my friends and neighbors to keep their distance; </p>
<p class="poetry">those who know me leave me alone in the darkness. </p>

</body>
</html>