<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Hosea 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hosea<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Fertility Cult Festivals Have Intoxicated Israel</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:1</span> O Israel, do not rejoice jubilantly like the nations,</p>
<p class="poetry">for you are unfaithful to your God.</p>
<p class="poetry">You love to receive a prostitute’s wages </p>
<p class="poetry">on all the floors where you thresh your grain. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:2</span> Threshing floors and wine vats will not feed the people, </p>
<p class="poetry">and new wine only deceives them. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Assyrian Exile Will Reverse the Egyptian Exodus</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:3</span> They will not remain in the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>’s land.</p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim will return to Egypt;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will eat ritually unclean food in Assyria. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:4</span> They will not pour out drink offerings of wine to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will not please him with their sacrifices.</p>
<p class="poetry">Their sacrifices will be like bread eaten while in mourning;</p>
<p class="poetry">all those who eat them will make themselves ritually unclean.</p>
<p class="poetry">For their bread will be only to satisfy their appetite;</p>
<p class="poetry">it will not come into the temple of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:5</span> So what will you do on the festival day,</p>
<p class="poetry">on the festival days of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>? </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">No Escape for the Israelites This Time</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:6</span> Look! Even if they flee from the destruction,</p>
<p class="poetry">Egypt will take hold of them,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Memphis will bury them.</p>
<p class="poetry">The weeds will inherit the silver they treasure —</p>
<p class="poetry">thorn bushes will occupy their homes. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:7</span> The time of judgment is about to arrive! </p>
<p class="poetry">The time of retribution is imminent! </p>
<p class="poetry">Israel will be humbled! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel Rejects Hosea’s Prophetic Exhortations</p><p class="poetry">The prophet is considered a fool —</p>
<p class="poetry">the inspired man is viewed as a madman —</p>
<p class="poetry">because of the multitude of your sins</p>
<p class="poetry">and your intense animosity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:8</span> The prophet is a watchman over Ephraim on behalf of God, </p>
<p class="poetry">yet traps are laid for him along all his paths; </p>
<p class="poetry">animosity rages against him in the land of his God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Best of Times, the Worst of Times</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:9</span> They have sunk deep into corruption </p>
<p class="poetry">as in the days of Gibeah.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will remember their wrongdoing.</p>
<p class="poetry">He will repay them for their sins. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:10</span> When I found Israel, it was like finding grapes in the wilderness.</p>
<p class="poetry">I viewed your ancestors like an early fig on a fig tree in its first season.</p>
<p class="poetry">Then they came to Baal Peor and they dedicated themselves to shame—</p>
<p class="poetry">they became as detestable as what they loved. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Fertility Worshipers Will Become Infertile</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:11</span> Ephraim will be like a bird;</p>
<p class="poetry">what they value will fly away.</p>
<p class="poetry">They will not bear children—</p>
<p class="poetry">they will not enjoy pregnancy—</p>
<p class="poetry">they will not even conceive! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:12</span> Even if they raise their children, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will take away every last one of them. </p>
<p class="poetry">Woe to them!</p>
<p class="poetry">For I will turn away from them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:13</span> Ephraim, as I have seen, has given their children for prey; </p>
<p class="poetry">Ephraim will bear his sons for slaughter. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:14</span> Give them, O <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>—</p>
<p class="poetry">what will you give them?</p>
<p class="poetry">Give them wombs that miscarry,</p>
<p class="poetry">and breasts that cannot nurse! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:15</span> Because of all their evil in Gilgal,</p>
<p class="poetry">I hate them there.</p>
<p class="poetry">On account of their evil deeds,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will drive them out of my land. </p>
<p class="poetry">I will no longer love them;</p>
<p class="poetry">all their rulers are rebels. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:16</span> Ephraim will be struck down —</p>
<p class="poetry">their root will be dried up;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will not yield any fruit.</p>
<p class="poetry">Even if they do bear children,</p>
<p class="poetry">I will kill their precious offspring. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">9:17</span> My God will reject them,</p>
<p class="poetry">for they have not obeyed him;</p>
<p class="poetry">so they will be fugitives among the nations. </p>

</body>
</html>