<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Romans 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s Rejection Considered</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span>  I am telling the truth in Christ (I am not lying!), for my conscience assures me in the Holy Spirit— <span class="verse">9:2</span> I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart. <span class="verse">9:3</span> For I could wish that I myself were accursed—cut off from Christ—for the sake of my people, my fellow countrymen, <span class="verse">9:4</span> who are Israelites. To them belong the adoption as sons, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the temple worship, and the promises. <span class="verse">9:5</span> To them belong the patriarchs, and from them, by human descent, came the Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever! Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:6</span> It is not as though the word of God had failed. For not all those who are descended from Israel are truly Israel, <span class="verse">9:7</span> nor are all the children Abraham’s true descendants; rather “<b><i>through Isaac will your descendants be counted</i></b>.” <span class="verse">9:8</span> This means it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God; rather, the children of promise are counted as descendants. <span class="verse">9:9</span> For this is what the promise declared: “<b><i>About a year from now</i></b> <b><i>I will return and Sarah will have a son</i></b>.” <span class="verse">9:10</span> Not only that, but when Rebekah had conceived children by one man, our ancestor Isaac— <span class="verse">9:11</span> even before they were born or had done anything good or bad (so that God’s purpose in election would stand, not by works but by his calling) — <span class="verse">9:12</span>  it was said to her, “<b><i>The older will serve the younger</i></b>,” <span class="verse">9:13</span> just as it is written: “<i><b>Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:14</span> What shall we say then? Is there injustice with God? Absolutely not! <span class="verse">9:15</span> For he says to Moses: “<i><b>I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion</b></i>.” <span class="verse">9:16</span> So then, it does not depend on human desire or exertion, but on God who shows mercy. <span class="verse">9:17</span> For the scripture says to Pharaoh: “<i><b>For this very purpose I have raised you up, that I may demonstrate my power in you, and that my name may be proclaimed in all the earth</b></i>.” <span class="verse">9:18</span> So then, God has mercy on whom he chooses to have mercy, and he hardens whom he chooses to harden. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:19</span> You will say to me then, “Why does he still find fault? For who has ever resisted his will?” <span class="verse">9:20</span> But who indeed are you—a mere human being —to talk back to God? <b><i>Does what is molded say to the molder</i></b>, “<b><i>Why have you made me like this?</i></b>” <span class="verse">9:21</span> Has the potter no right to make from the same lump of clay one vessel for special use and another for ordinary use? <span class="verse">9:22</span> But what if God, willing to demonstrate his wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much patience the objects of wrath prepared for destruction? <span class="verse">9:23</span> And what if he is willing to make known the wealth of his glory on the objects of mercy that he has prepared beforehand for glory— <span class="verse">9:24</span> even us, whom he has called, not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles? <span class="verse">9:25</span> As he also says in Hosea:</p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>I will call those who were not my people</b></i>, ‘<i><b>My people</b></i>,’ <b><i>and I will call her who was unloved,</i></b> ‘<i><b>My beloved</b></i>.’” </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">9:26</span> “<b><i>And in the very place</i></b> <i><b>where it was said to them</b></i>, ‘<i><b>You are not my people</b></i>,’ </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>there they will be called</i></b> ‘<i><b>sons of the living God</b></i>.’” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:27</span> And Isaiah cries out on behalf of Israel, “<i>Though the number of the children</i> <i>of Israel are as the sand of the sea</i>, <i>only the remnant will be saved</i>, <span class="verse">9:28</span> <i>for</i> <i>the Lord will execute his sentence on the earth completely and quickly</i>.” <span class="verse">9:29</span> Just as Isaiah predicted, </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“If the Lord of Heaven’s Armies had not left us descendants, </p>
<p class="otpoetry">we would have become like Sodom, </p>
<p class="otpoetry">and we would have resembled Gomorrah.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s Rejection Culpable </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:30</span> What shall we say then?—that the Gentiles who did not pursue righteousness obtained it, that is, a righteousness that is by faith, <span class="verse">9:31</span> but Israel even though pursuing a law of righteousness did not attain it. <span class="verse">9:32</span> Why not? Because they pursued it not by faith but (as if it were possible) by works. They stumbled over the stumbling stone, <span class="verse">9:33</span> just as it is written, </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>Look, I am laying in Zion a stone that will cause people to stumble</b></i></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and a rock that will make them fall,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>yet the one who believes in him will not be put to shame</i>.</b>” </p>

</body>
</html>