<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Song of Solomon 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Song of Solomon<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:1</span> I have entered my garden, O my sister, my bride;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have gathered my myrrh with my balsam spice.</p>
<p class="poetry">I have eaten my honeycomb and my honey;</p>
<p class="poetry">I have drunk my wine and my milk!</p>
<p class="sosspeaker"><b><i>The Poet to the Couple:</i></b> </p><p class="poetry">Eat, friends, and drink! </p>
<p class="poetry">Drink freely, O lovers! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Trials of Love: The Beloved’s Dream of Losing Her Lover</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved about Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:2</span> I was asleep, but my mind was dreaming. </p>
<p class="poetry">Listen! My lover is knocking at the door! </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Lover to His Beloved:</p><p class="poetry">“Open for me, my sister, my darling,</p>
<p class="poetry">my dove, my flawless one!</p>
<p class="poetry">My head is drenched with dew,</p>
<p class="poetry">my hair with the dampness of the night.” </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to Her Lover:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> “I have already taken off my robe—must I put it on again?</p>
<p class="poetry">I have already washed my feet—must I soil them again?”</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> My lover thrust his hand through the hole, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my feelings were stirred for him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> I arose to open for my beloved;</p>
<p class="poetry">my hands dripped with myrrh—</p>
<p class="poetry">my fingers flowed with myrrh</p>
<p class="poetry">on the handles of the lock. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> I opened for my beloved,</p>
<p class="poetry">but my lover had already turned and gone away. </p>
<p class="poetry">I fell into despair when he departed. </p>
<p class="poetry">I looked for him but did not find him;</p>
<p class="poetry">I called him but he did not answer me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> The watchmen found me as they made their rounds in the city.</p>
<p class="poetry">They beat me, they bruised me;</p>
<p class="poetry">they took away my cloak, those watchmen on the walls! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Triumph of Love: The Beloved Praises Her Lover</p><p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to the Maidens:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> I admonish you, O maidens of Jerusalem—</p>
<p class="poetry">If you find my beloved, what will you tell him?</p>
<p class="poetry">Tell him that I am lovesick! </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Maidens to The Beloved:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> Why is your beloved better than others, </p>
<p class="poetry">O most beautiful of women?</p>
<p class="poetry">Why is your beloved better than others,</p>
<p class="poetry">that you would admonish us in this manner? </p>
<p class="sosspeaker">The Beloved to the Maidens:</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> My beloved is dazzling and ruddy; </p>
<p class="poetry">he stands out in comparison to all other men. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> His head is like the purest gold. </p>
<p class="poetry">His hair is curly —black like a raven. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:12</span> His eyes are like doves by streams of water,</p>
<p class="poetry">washed in milk, mounted like jewels. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:13</span> His cheeks are like garden beds full of balsam trees yielding perfume.</p>
<p class="poetry">His lips are like lilies dripping with drops of myrrh. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:14</span> His arms are like rods of gold set with chrysolite.</p>
<p class="poetry">His abdomen is like polished ivory inlaid with sapphires. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:15</span> His legs are like pillars of marble set on bases of pure gold.</p>
<p class="poetry">His appearance is like Lebanon, choice as its cedars. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:16</span> His mouth is very sweet; </p>
<p class="poetry">he is totally desirable. </p>
<p class="poetry">This is my beloved!</p>
<p class="poetry">This is my companion, O maidens of Jerusalem! </p>

</body>
</html>