<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Mark 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Sower </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Again he began to teach by the lake. Such a large crowd gathered around him that he got into a boat on the lake and sat there while the whole crowd was on the shore by the lake. <span class="verse">4:2</span> He taught them many things in parables, and in his teaching said to them: <span class="verse">4:3</span> “Listen! A sower went out to sow. <span class="verse">4:4</span> And as he sowed, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it. <span class="verse">4:5</span> Other seed fell on rocky ground where it did not have much soil. It sprang up at once because the soil was not deep. <span class="verse">4:6</span> When the sun came up it was scorched, and because it did not have sufficient root, it withered. <span class="verse">4:7</span> Other seed fell among the thorns, and they grew up and choked it, and it did not produce grain. <span class="verse">4:8</span> But other seed fell on good soil and produced grain, sprouting and growing; some yielded thirty times as much, some sixty, and some a hundred times.” <span class="verse">4:9</span> And he said, “Whoever has ears to hear had better listen!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Purpose of Parables </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:10</span> When he was alone, those around him with the twelve asked him about the parables. <span class="verse">4:11</span> He said to them, “The secret of the kingdom of God has been given to you. But to those outside, everything is in parables, </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> so that <b><i>although they look they may look but not see,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and although they hear they may hear but not understand,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>so they may not repent and be forgiven</b></i>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> He said to them, “Don’t you understand this parable? Then how will you understand any parable? <span class="verse">4:14</span> The sower sows the word. <span class="verse">4:15</span> These are the ones on the path where the word is sown: Whenever they hear, immediately Satan comes and snatches the word that was sown in them. <span class="verse">4:16</span> These are the ones sown on rocky ground: As soon as they hear the word, they receive it with joy. <span class="verse">4:17</span> But they have no root in themselves and do not endure. Then, when trouble or persecution comes because of the word, immediately they fall away. <span class="verse">4:18</span> Others are the ones sown among thorns: They are those who hear the word, <span class="verse">4:19</span> but worldly cares, the seductiveness of wealth, and the desire for other things come in and choke the word, and it produces nothing. <span class="verse">4:20</span> But these are the ones sown on good soil: They hear the word and receive it and bear fruit, one thirty times as much, one sixty, and one a hundred.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Lamp</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:21</span> He also said to them, “A lamp isn’t brought to be put under a basket or under a bed, is it? Isn’t it to be placed on a lampstand? <span class="verse">4:22</span> For nothing is hidden except to be revealed, and nothing concealed except to be brought to light. <span class="verse">4:23</span> If anyone has ears to hear, he had better listen!” <span class="verse">4:24</span> And he said to them, “Take care about what you hear. The measure you use will be the measure you receive, and more will be added to you. <span class="verse">4:25</span> For whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Growing Seed</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:26</span> He also said, “The kingdom of God is like someone who spreads seed on the ground. <span class="verse">4:27</span> He goes to sleep and gets up, night and day, and the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how. <span class="verse">4:28</span> By itself the soil produces a crop, first the stalk, then the head, then the full grain in the head. <span class="verse">4:29</span> And when the grain is ripe, he sends in the sickle because the harvest has come.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Mustard Seed </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:30</span> He also asked, “To what can we compare the kingdom of God, or what parable can we use to present it? <span class="verse">4:31</span> It is like a mustard seed that when sown in the ground, even though it is the smallest of all the seeds in the ground— <span class="verse">4:32</span> when it is sown, it grows up, becomes the greatest of all garden plants, and grows large branches so that the wild birds can nest in its shade.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Use of Parables </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:33</span> So with many parables like these, he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear. <span class="verse">4:34</span> He did not speak to them without a parable. But privately he explained everything to his own disciples. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Stilling of a Storm </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:35</span> On that day, when evening came, Jesus said to his disciples, “Let’s go across to the other side of the lake.” <span class="verse">4:36</span> So after leaving the crowd, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat, and other boats were with him. <span class="verse">4:37</span> Now a great windstorm developed and the waves were breaking into the boat, so that the boat was nearly swamped. <span class="verse">4:38</span> But he was in the stern, sleeping on a cushion. They woke him up and said to him, “Teacher, don’t you care that we are about to die?” <span class="verse">4:39</span> So he got up and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, “Be quiet! Calm down!” Then the wind stopped, and it was dead calm. <span class="verse">4:40</span> And he said to them, “Why are you cowardly? Do you still not have faith?” <span class="verse">4:41</span> They were overwhelmed by fear and said to one another, “Who then is this? Even the wind and sea obey him!” </p>

</body>
</html>