<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction to the Book</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon, son of David, king of Israel: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:2</span> To learn wisdom and moral instruction, </p>
<p class="poetry">to discern wise counsel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:3</span> To receive moral instruction in skillful living, </p>
<p class="poetry">with righteousness, justice, and equity. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:4</span> To impart shrewdness to the morally naive, </p>
<p class="poetry">a discerning plan to the young person. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:5</span> (Let the wise also hear and gain instruction, </p>
<p class="poetry">and let the discerning acquire guidance!) </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:6</span> To discern the meaning of a proverb and a parable, </p>
<p class="poetry">the sayings of the wise and their riddles. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Introduction to the Theme of the Book</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:7</span> Fearing the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> is the beginning of discernment, </p>
<p class="poetry">but fools have despised wisdom and moral instruction. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:8</span> Listen, my child, to the instruction from your father,</p>
<p class="poetry">and do not forsake the teaching from your mother. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:9</span> For they will be like an elegant garland on your head,</p>
<p class="poetry">and like pendants around your neck. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Admonition to Avoid Easy but Unjust Riches</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:10</span> My child, if sinners try to entice you,</p>
<p class="poetry">do not consent! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:11</span> If they say, “Come with us!</p>
<p class="poetry">We will lie in wait to shed blood; </p>
<p class="poetry">we will ambush an innocent person capriciously. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:12</span> We will swallow them alive like Sheol, </p>
<p class="poetry">those full of vigor like those going down to the Pit. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:13</span> We will seize all kinds of precious wealth; </p>
<p class="poetry">we will fill our houses with plunder. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:14</span> Join with us! </p>
<p class="poetry">We will all share equally in what we steal.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> My child, do not go down their way, </p>
<p class="poetry">withhold yourself from their path; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> for they are eager to inflict harm, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they hasten to shed blood. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> Surely it is futile to spread a net</p>
<p class="poetry">in plain sight of any bird, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:18</span> but these men lie in wait for their own blood, </p>
<p class="poetry">they ambush their own lives! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:19</span> Such are the ways of all who gain profit unjustly; </p>
<p class="poetry">it takes away the life of those who obtain it! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warning Against Disregarding Wisdom</p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:20</span> Wisdom calls out in the street, </p>
<p class="poetry">she shouts loudly in the plazas; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:21</span> at the head of the noisy streets she calls,</p>
<p class="poetry">in the entrances of the gates in the city she utters her words: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:22</span> “How long will you simpletons love naiveté? </p>
<p class="poetry">How long have mockers delighted in mockery? </p>
<p class="poetry">And how long will fools hate knowledge? </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:23</span> You should respond to my rebuke. </p>
<p class="poetry">Then I would pour out my thoughts to you;</p>
<p class="poetry">I would make my words known to you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:24</span> However, because I called but you refused to listen, </p>
<p class="poetry">because I stretched out my hand but no one was paying attention, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:25</span> and you neglected all my advice,</p>
<p class="poetry">and did not comply with my rebuke, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:26</span> so I myself will laugh when disaster strikes you, </p>
<p class="poetry">I will mock when what you dread comes, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:27</span> when what you dread comes like a whirlwind, </p>
<p class="poetry">and disaster strikes you like a devastating storm, </p>
<p class="poetry">when distressing trouble comes on you.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:28</span> Then they will call to me, but I will not answer;</p>
<p class="poetry">they will diligently seek me, but they will not find me.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:29</span> Because they hated moral knowledge, </p>
<p class="poetry">and did not choose to fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:30</span> they did not comply with my advice,</p>
<p class="poetry">they spurned all my rebuke. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:31</span> Therefore they will eat from the fruit of their way, </p>
<p class="poetry">and they will be stuffed full of their own counsel. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:32</span> For the waywardness of the </p>
<p class="poetry">simpletons will kill them, </p>
<p class="poetry">and the careless ease of fools will destroy them.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:33</span> But the one who listens to me will live in security, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will be at ease from the dread of harm.” </p>

</body>
</html>