<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Proverbs 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Proverbs<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Benefits of Seeking Wisdom </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:1</span> My child, if you receive my words,</p>
<p class="poetry">and store up my commands inside yourself, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:2</span> by making your ear attentive to wisdom, </p>
<p class="poetry">and by turning your heart to understanding, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:3</span> indeed, if you call out for discernment —</p>
<p class="poetry">shout loudly for understanding—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:4</span> if you seek it like silver, </p>
<p class="poetry">and search for it like hidden treasure, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:5</span> then you will understand how to fear the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, </p>
<p class="poetry">and you will discover knowledge about God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> gives wisdom,</p>
<p class="poetry">and from his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> He stores up effective counsel for the upright, </p>
<p class="poetry">and is like a shield for those who live with integrity, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> to guard the paths of the righteous </p>
<p class="poetry">and to protect the way of his pious ones. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> Then you will understand righteousness and justice</p>
<p class="poetry">and equity—every good way. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> For wisdom will enter your heart, </p>
<p class="poetry">and moral knowledge will be attractive to you. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Discretion will protect you, </p>
<p class="poetry">understanding will guard you,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> to deliver you from the way of the wicked, </p>
<p class="poetry">from those speaking perversity, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> who leave the upright paths</p>
<p class="poetry">to walk on the dark ways, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:14</span> who delight in doing evil, </p>
<p class="poetry">they rejoice in perverse evil; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:15</span> whose paths are morally crooked, </p>
<p class="poetry">and who are devious in their ways; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:16</span> to deliver you from the adulterous woman, </p>
<p class="poetry">from the loose woman who has flattered you with her words; </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:17</span> who leaves the husband from her younger days, </p>
<p class="poetry">and has ignored her marriage covenant made before God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:18</span> For she has set her house by death, </p>
<p class="poetry">and her paths by the place of the departed spirits. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:19</span> None who go in to her will return, </p>
<p class="poetry">nor will they reach the paths of life. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:20</span> So you will walk in the way of good people, </p>
<p class="poetry">and will keep on the paths of the righteous. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:21</span> For the upright will reside in the land,</p>
<p class="poetry">and those with integrity will remain in it,</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:22</span> but the wicked will be removed from the land,</p>
<p class="poetry">and the treacherous will be torn away from it.</p>

</body>
</html>