<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) 1 Samuel 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Samuel<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> Then the people of Kiriath Jearim came and took the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>; they brought it to the house of Abinadab located on the hill. They consecrated Eleazar his son to guard the ark of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Further Conflict with the Philistines</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:2</span> It was quite a long time—some twenty years in all—that the ark stayed at Kiriath Jearim. All the people of Israel longed for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">7:3</span> Samuel said to all the people of Israel, “If you are really turning to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> with all your hearts, remove from among you the foreign gods and the images of Ashtoreth. Give your hearts to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> and serve only him. Then he will deliver you from the hand of the Philistines.” <span class="verse">7:4</span> So the Israelites removed the Baals and images of Ashtoreth. They served only the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:5</span> Then Samuel said, “Gather all Israel to Mizpah, and I will pray to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> on your behalf.” <span class="verse">7:6</span> After they had assembled at Mizpah, they drew water and poured it out before the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. They fasted on that day, and they confessed there, “We have sinned against the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.” So Samuel led the people of Israel at Mizpah. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:7</span> When the Philistines heard that the Israelites had gathered at Mizpah, the leaders of the Philistines went up against Israel. When the Israelites heard about this, they were afraid of the Philistines. <span class="verse">7:8</span> The Israelites said to Samuel, “Keep crying out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> our God so that he may save us from the hand of the Philistines!” <span class="verse">7:9</span> So Samuel took a nursing lamb and offered it as a whole burnt offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Samuel cried out to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> on Israel’s behalf, and the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> answered him.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:10</span> As Samuel was offering burnt offerings, the Philistines approached to do battle with Israel. But on that day the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> thundered loudly against the Philistines. He caused them to panic, and they were defeated by Israel. <span class="verse">7:11</span> Then the men of Israel left Mizpah and chased the Philistines, striking them down all the way to an area below Beth Car. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:12</span> Samuel took a stone and placed it between Mizpah and Shen. He named it Ebenezer, saying, “Up to here the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> has helped us.” <span class="verse">7:13</span> So the Philistines were defeated; they did not invade Israel again. The hand of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:14</span> The cities that the Philistines had captured from Israel were returned to Israel, from Ekron to Gath. Israel also delivered their territory from the control of the Philistines. There was also peace between Israel and the Amorites. <span class="verse">7:15</span> So Samuel led Israel all the days of his life. <span class="verse">7:16</span> Year after year he used to travel the circuit of Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpah; he used to judge Israel in all these places. <span class="verse">7:17</span> Then he would return to Ramah, because his home was there. He also judged Israel there and built an altar to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> there. </p>

</body>
</html>