<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) Leviticus 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Leviticus<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Grain-Offering Regulations: Offering of Raw Flour</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> “‘When a person presents a grain offering to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, his offering must consist of choice wheat flour, and he must pour olive oil on it and put frankincense on it. <span class="verse">2:2</span> Then he must bring it to the sons of Aaron, the priests, and the priest must scoop out from there a handful of its choice wheat flour and some of its olive oil in addition to all of its frankincense, and the priest must offer its memorial portion up in smoke on the altar—it is a gift of a soothing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">2:3</span> The remainder of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and to his sons —it is most holy from the gifts of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Processed Grain Offerings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> “‘When you present an offering of grain baked in an oven, it must be made of choice wheat flour baked into unleavened loaves mixed with olive oil or unleavened wafers smeared with olive oil. <span class="verse">2:5</span> If your offering is a grain offering made on the griddle, it must be choice wheat flour mixed with olive oil, unleavened. <span class="verse">2:6</span> Crumble it in pieces and pour olive oil on it—it is a grain offering. <span class="verse">2:7</span> If your offering is a grain offering made in a pan, it must be made of choice wheat flour deep fried in olive oil. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:8</span> “‘You must bring the grain offering that must be made from these to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. Present it to the priest, and he will bring it to the altar. <span class="verse">2:9</span> Then the priest must take up from the grain offering its memorial portion and offer it up in smoke on the altar—it is a gift of a soothing aroma to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">2:10</span> The remainder of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and to his sons—it is most holy from the gifts of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Additional Grain-Offering Regulations </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> “‘No grain offering which you present to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> can be made with yeast, for you must not offer up in smoke any yeast or honey as a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">2:12</span> You can present them to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> as an offering of firstfruit, but they must not go up to the altar for a soothing aroma. <span class="verse">2:13</span> Moreover, you must season every one of your grain offerings with salt; you must not allow the salt of the covenant of your God to be missing from your grain offering —on every one of your grain offerings you must present salt. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> “‘If you present a grain offering of first ripe grain to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>, you must present your grain offering of first ripe grain as soft kernels roasted in fire—crushed bits of fresh grain. <span class="verse">2:15</span> And you must put olive oil on it and set frankincense on it—it is a grain offering. <span class="verse">2:16</span> Then the priest must offer its memorial portion up in smoke—some of its crushed bits, some of its olive oil, in addition to all of its frankincense—it is a gift to the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>