<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 (noteless) John 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Turning Water into Wine</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Now on the third day there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee. Jesus’ mother was there, <span class="verse">2:2</span> and Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the wedding. <span class="verse">2:3</span> When the wine ran out, Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no wine left.” <span class="verse">2:4</span> Jesus replied, “Woman, why are you saying this to me? My time has not yet come.” <span class="verse">2:5</span> His mother told the servants, “Whatever he tells you, do it.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:6</span> Now there were six stone water jars there for Jewish ceremonial washing, each holding twenty or thirty gallons. <span class="verse">2:7</span> Jesus told the servants, “Fill the water jars with water.” So they filled them up to the very top. <span class="verse">2:8</span> Then he told them, “Now draw some out and take it to the head steward,” and they did. <span class="verse">2:9</span> When the head steward tasted the water that had been turned to wine, not knowing where it came from (though the servants who had drawn the water knew), he called the bridegroom <span class="verse">2:10</span> and said to him, “Everyone serves the good wine first, and then the cheaper wine when the guests are drunk. You have kept the good wine until now!” <span class="verse">2:11</span> Jesus did this as the first of his miraculous signs, in Cana of Galilee. In this way he revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Cleansing the Temple</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:12</span> After this he went down to Capernaum with his mother and brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there a few days. <span class="verse">2:13</span> Now the Jewish feast of Passover was near, so Jesus went up to Jerusalem. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span>  He found in the temple courts those who were selling oxen and sheep and doves, and the money changers sitting at tables. <span class="verse">2:15</span> So he made a whip of cords and drove them all out of the temple courts, with the sheep and the oxen. He scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables. <span class="verse">2:16</span> To those who sold the doves he said, “Take these things away from here! Do not make my Father’s house a marketplace!” <span class="verse">2:17</span> His disciples remembered that it was written, “<b><i>Zeal</i></b> <b><i>for your house will devour me</i></b>.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:18</span> So then the Jewish leaders responded, “What sign can you show us, since you are doing these things?” <span class="verse">2:19</span> Jesus replied, “Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up again.” <span class="verse">2:20</span> Then the Jewish leaders said to him, “This temple has been under construction for forty-six years, and are you going to raise it up in three days?” <span class="verse">2:21</span> But Jesus was speaking about the temple of his body. <span class="verse">2:22</span> So after he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the scripture and the saying that Jesus had spoken. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus at the Passover Feast</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:23</span> Now while Jesus was in Jerusalem at the Feast of the Passover, many people believed in his name because they saw the miraculous signs he was doing. <span class="verse">2:24</span> But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, because he knew all people. <span class="verse">2:25</span> He did not need anyone to testify about man, for he knew what was in man. </p>

</body>
</html>